
Physica D 226 (2007)

ho
ac

, H

ity
f Ar
bing

m 1
12
ated
Abstract

Using detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) we perform scaling analysis of short datasets of length 500–1500 data points. We quantify the
long range correlation (exponent α) by computing the mean value of the local exponents αL (in the asymptotic regime). The local exponents
are obtained as the (numerical) derivative of the logarithm of the fluctuation function F(s) with respect to the logarithm of the scale factor
s:αL = d log10 F(s)/d log10 s. These local exponents display huge variations and complicate the correct quantification of the underlying
correlations. We propose the use of the phase randomized surrogate (PRS), which preserves the long range correlations of the original data,
to minimize the variations in the local exponents. Using the numerically generated uncorrelated and long range correlated data, we show that
performing DFA on several realizations of PRS and estimating αL from the averaged fluctuation functions (of all realizations) can minimize the
variations in αL . The application of this approach to the fetal cardiac data (RR intervals) is discussed and we show that there is a statistically
significant correlation between α and the gestation age.
c© 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Time series; Biological signal processing and instrumentation; Fluctuation phenomena, random processes, noise and Brownian motion

1. Introduction

The art of quantifying long range correlations (LRC) in
a given system has received considerable interest in diverse
fields. By identifying the long range correlations, it is possible
to understand the nature of the correlations governing the
dynamics of the system and classify the system into different
dynamical states based on the correlations. One of the most
commonly used methods to quantify the correlations in the
given system is detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) [1,2].
Another method becoming increasingly used for quantifying
LRC is multiresolution wavelet analysis [3,4] (and the

LRC in the system [6–8]. Traditionally, the local exponents
are obtained [6,7] from the derivative of the logarithm of the
fluctuation function (see methodology section for details) with
respect to the logarithm of the scale factor. In [8], an αβ filter
based on the Kalman filter approach, has been introduced to
estimate the local exponents [8] (Note: Here αβ represents
the name of the new filter introduced in [8] to quantify
LRC in a given dataset and should not be confused with the
fluctuation exponent α or the power spectral exponent β used to
characterize the LRC in a given dataset.). Using this approach
the LRC in the human cardiac data (RR intervals) (available
Detrended fluctuation analysis of s
cardi

R.B. Govindana,∗, J.D. Wilsona, H. Preißlb,c

aGraduate Institute of Technology, Univers
bDepartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University o

cMEG-Center, University of Tu¨

Received 1 June 2006; received in revised for
Available online

Communic
references therein). Recently, much emphasis is placed on
observation of local exponents αL , as commonly done in
correlation dimension analysis [5], to correctly characterize the

∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 501 6837083; fax: +1 501 5698039.
E-mail address: rbgovindan@ualr.edu (R.B. Govindan).

0167-2789/$ - see front matter c© 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.physd.2006.10.019
23–31
www.elsevier.com/locate/physd

rt datasets: An application to fetal
data

. Eswaranb, J.Q. Campbellb, C.L. Loweryb

of Arkansas at Little Rock, AR 72204, USA
kansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA
en, 72076, Tu¨bingen, Germany

8 September 2006; accepted 27 October 2006
December 2006
by R. Roy
via http://www.physionet.org) has been revisited and shown to
distinguish between the normal and congestive heart failure
cases. By applying this method to the fetal heart data [9,10],
it has been demonstrated that the LRC in the fetal heart data
can be retrieved even in the samples containing 50% of random
missing values or up to 50 min of consecutive missing samples
in recordings of ∼8 h length.







hy

iω iωG
24 R.B. Govindan et al. / P

The local exponents estimated using traditional methods
will display huge variations especially for short datasets
which makes the quantification of the LRC difficult. In this
paper, we show that the phase randomized surrogate (PRS)
which preserves the power spectrum (and hence two point
correlations) of the given data can be used to minimize the large
variations in the local exponents computed from the fluctuation
function. For a given dataset, we simulate several realizations
of PRS and perform DFA for each realization. Then the local
exponents are estimated using the averaged DFA fluctuation
function from all the realizations. We apply this approach to
the numerically generated uncorrelated and LRC data and show
that the local exponents αL and the fluctuation exponents α can
be reliably estimated.

The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we discuss
the methodology of DFA and the surrogate analysis. The
application of the current approach to the numerically simulated
datasets will be discussed in Section 3 and its application to
fetal cardiac data will be dealt with in Section 4. In Section 5,
we discuss the results and draw conclusions. Our aim is not
to compare the performance of the αβ filter and the current
approach and hence throughout this paper we will discuss only
the application of phase randomized surrogates to minimize
variations in the local exponents.

2. Methodology of DFA and surrogate analysis

DFA allows reliable quantification of the correlations in non-
stationary data. It has been applied to wide variety of datasets
ranging from heart-beat time series [2,11,12], atmospheric
temperature data [13], to DNA sequences [1]. A list (not
complete) of applications of DFA to various disciplines is well
documented in [14]. Let xi , i = 1 to N be the observations
(time series) made as a function of time (not necessarily a
continuous function of time) and N be the length of the series.
The methodology of DFA involves four steps [12]:

(1) Construct profile function as follows: yk = ∑ki=1(xi −
x)/σ (x), where x and σ(x) indicate the mean and standard
deviation of xi . Subtraction of the mean in this step is
not mandatory as it will be eliminated in step 3. The
normalization by standard deviation is to facilitate the
(linear) combination of the different fluctuation functions
of the surrogates (see below).

(2) Divide the profile function into M = N/s disjoint time
windows (indexed ν) of size s. When the length of the
window is not an integer multiple of the length of the data, a
short portion of the data at the end of the record will be left
unanalyzed. In order not to discard this portion, we divide
the profile starting from the other end [12]. Thus we have a
total of (ν = 1 to) 2M disjoint segments of size s.

(3) The data inside ν-th window of the profile are fitted by a
m-th order polynomial pmν . Depending on the order of the
polynomial, DFA is designated as DFAm. In general DFA
of order m will remove a polynomial trend of order m from
profile and hence a polynomial trend of order m − 1 from

the original time series. Thus successive higher orders of
DFA will systematically eliminate the higher order trends
sica D 226 (2007) 23–31

present, if any, in the data allowing reliable quantification
of the correlations.

(4) Finally we compute the DFA fluctuation function F(s) as
follows:

F(s) =
√√√√ 1

2M

2M∑
ν=1

1
s

s∑
k=1
[y(ν−1)s+k − pm(ν−1)s+k]2.

In order to establish the relation between F(s) and s, steps
(2)–(4) are repeated for different values of s. Usually the
minimum value of s is chosen asm+2 (Note:m is the order
of the DFA.) [15] and the maximum is chosen as one quarter
of the length of record (i.e. N/4). For long range correlated
data F(s) follows a power law: F(s) ∼ sα , where α is
called the DFA fluctuation exponent. The exponent α is
estimated as follows:

α = lim
s→∞

d log10 F(s)
d log10 s

. (1)

Numerically we compute the local exponents αL as follows:

αL i =
log10 F(si+1)− log10 F(si )

log10 si+1 − log10 si
,

where i is the index counting the box size s and takes values
from 1 to number of windows (s values) minus 1. For all
practical purposes we approximate α by the mean value of
the last few values of αL . For datasets of length 1/2K and
1K data points, we consider last 10 points and for 3/2K data
points we consider the last 15 points for the estimation of α.
(Note: 1 K denotes 1000 data points.) For short range and
uncorrelated data α takes a value of 0.5. For anti-correlated
data α is less than 0.5. For long range correlated data α
is greater than 0.5. The fluctuation exponent α is related
to the exponent β obtained from the power spectrum by
α = (1+ β)/2.

As mentioned in the introduction, αL is obtained from short
datasets display huge fluctuations. In a theoretical setting,
scaling analysis of numerous copies of the given dataset (having
the same correlation aspects) can be performed to minimize the
fluctuations in local exponents [15]. For experimental datasets,
assuming ergodicity, one has to repeat the same experiment
several times to get multiple copies of the original data so
as to minimize these fluctuations, which is a tedious process.
Instead, if it is possible to generate several copies of the given
dataset preserving the (two point) correlations, the scaling
analysis can be performed for each copy. An average of the
results of all the copies will reduce the variations in the local
exponents. One possible approach to create several copies of the
dataset preserving the correlation aspects of the original data
is by generating PRS. This type of surrogate was introduced
in nonlinear time series analysis by Theiler [16] to address
the hypothesis of whether or not the given data are generated
by linearly correlated noise with Gaussian innovations. This is
generated by taking the Fourier transform F(ω) of the data xi
(after setting the mean to zero). F(ω) can be decomposed into
amplitude series r(ω) and phase series eiω, F(ω) = r(ω)eiω.

Then e is replaced by the phase series e obtained for
Gaussian distributed random numbers (ηi ) with same length N



sic
R.B. Govindan et al. / Phy

as the original data xi [17]. On the phase randomized signal
F ′(ω) = r(ω)eiωG an inverse Fourier transform is applied
to get PRS, x ′(t) in time domain. It is easy to understand
that the power spectrum P(ω) (square of the amplitude series)
computed from x(t) and x ′(t) will be the same and both will
exhibit the same two point correlations (precisely, will have
the same α and β values). Because of the fact that x ′(t) differs
from x(t) only in the random orientations, the local exponents
αL computed from x(t) and x ′(t) will show similar (large)
variations. However, in the case of the latter, we have an
additional advantage of generating several realizations of x ′(t)
and thereby obtaining a better estimate for αL and α from the
average of F(s). In the next section we discuss the application
of this approach to the numerically generated data and show
that using this approach α can be estimated reliably. Finally, we
discuss the application of this approach to the fetal cardiac data.

For a given dataset, the different realizations of PRS will
have different standard deviation. As a result, the F(s) obtained
for each realization will have slightly different magnitudes
though all of them will run parallel to each other (indicating
that they exhibit the same scaling behavior). This will cause
problems when the F(s) from different realizations are linearly
combined. In order to avoid this problem, in the construction
of the profile function, (see step (1) of DFA), in addition to
removing the mean value, we also normalize the data by the
standard deviation.

For all the systems discussed here we use second order
polynomial detrending, DFA2, however, the proposed method
can be applied to DFA of any order. For each dataset
considered in this work we generate 50 realizations of PRS and
compute the DFA2 fluctuation function of each realization. As
mentioned above, PRS is introduced to identify the presence of
nonlinear structure in a given time series. At 95% significance
level, a recommendation of 19 (39) different realizations of
surrogates for one (two) sided tests has been made [18].
However, in this work we use 50 different realizations of PRS
to minimize the variations in αL . Further, in the following
discussion we designate the average fluctuation function of
all the (50) realizations as the averaged surrogate fluctuation
function.

3. Application to uncorrelated and long range correlated
data

Long range correlated and uncorrelated data are generated
by the Fourier filter technique [19]. These datasets are
retrogradely generated by exploiting the property that the power
spectrum of these signals displays the following power-law:
P(ω) ∼ ω−β . LRC with the desired exponent α can be
generated by multiplying F(ω) by ω−β/2. Here F(ω) is the
Fourier transform of the zero mean and unit variance Gaussian
white noise process ηi for which β is zero. The modified
function is then inverse Fourier transformed back to obtain LRC
in the time domain. Different copies of the LRC data can be
generated for different seed values of ηi .
For this study we consider datasets with exponent α
ranging from 0.5 to 1.5 in steps of 0.1. The DFA2 fluctuation
a D 226 (2007) 23–31 25

functions F(s) versus scale function s of a single realization
of each exponent are given in Fig. 1a (in double logarithmic
representation) for 1/2K, 1K and 3/2K (and are indicated as
Original data). Qualitatively, it is easy to infer the scaling
behavior of the fluctuation functions by comparing with the
straight lines with exponents 0.5 (first line on the bottom right
corner), 1 (second line on the bottom right corner) and 1.5
(at the top left corner). The averaged surrogate fluctuation
functions obtained for these datasets are also shown in Fig. 1
(and are indicated as Surrogate data). The fluctuation functions
obtained from surrogates display less (or almost no visible)
variations compared to ones obtained from the original data.
As the averaged surrogate fluctuation functions display less
variations, the scaling exponent can be estimated within a
narrow range using these fluctuation functions (see Fig. 1
results of surrogate data). In order to reveal variations in
F(s) we plot in Fig. 2 the local exponents αL for three
different datasets α = 0.5, 1 and 1.5 versus the logarithm
of the scale size s. It is very clear that the αL obtained from
the original data (gray color) display wide fluctuations while
those obtained from the surrogate data (black color) display
narrow fluctuations around the mean α value expected for
that dataset. It is also interesting to note that the range of
these variations (width) around the mean α value is larger
for the higher exponents than for the smaller. In Fig. 2, the
fluctuation functions obtained from the original data, and from
the averaged surrogate fluctuation functions as well, in the short
range s < 10 samples display a strong deviation from the
expected scaling behavior and is an intrinsic problem of DFA.
The degree of deviation from the expected scaling behavior
depends on the nature of α and seems to be independent of the
length N of the data. These observations are similar to those
found by Hu et al. [20]. Further, in the applications which focus
on short-range correlations, a correction factor is introduced by
Kantelhardt et al. [15] to correct the anomalies at short time
scales and thereby to reliably estimate the short term exponents.
This correction term can be applied for any given order of
DFA. In this application we are interested in the long range
correlation aspects of the fetal cardiac data and hence we do
not apply corrections to minimize the anomalies at short time
scales.

Next, we show that the variations in F(s) can be reduced if
it is obtained as the ensemble average of different (ensemble)
copies of the data (Note: We use the term “ensemble copies”
to indicate the different copies of the original data and the term
“realizations” to indicate the different copies of the surrogate
data). Each ensemble copy will have the same correlation aspect
as the data under study. We consider two different scenarios
and compare them with the results obtained using PRS. In
scenario 1, for each input exponent αin, we generate 15 different
ensemble copies of the data. The fluctuation function obtained
for each copy is averaged across different ensemble copies.
As mentioned in the methodology, the DFA exponent α is
computed from the average fluctuation function through αL .
In Fig. 3, the left side panels display the α values and their

variations (standard deviation of αL in the asymptotic limit)
obtained for three different data lengths. For 1/2K the variation



hy

s
1K
obtained for α = 0.5–1.5 in steps of 0.1. For the sake of clarity we have shifted the curves by a constant factor. Results obtained for the original data are shown
on the left side. For each dataset used on the left side, the averaged surrogate fluctuation functions are plotted versus the scale size s on the right side in double
logarithmic representation. The solid lines shown on the right (bottom) corner correspond to α = 0.5 (first line from bottom) and α = 1 (second line from bottom)
and are to guide the eye. The solid line shown on the left top corner corresponds to α = 1.5 and is also to guide the eye.

is quite high while it is low for 1K and 3/2K. Between 1K
and 3/2K, the results are comparable (i.e.) both show the
same degree of variations. As we propose to use 50 surrogate
realizations for a given dataset, in scenario 2 for each exponent
αin we generate 50 ensemble copies of the data. The scaling
exponents obtained (as discussed above for 15 ensemble copies)
are shown in the middle column of Fig. 3. Compared to the
results of scenario 1, the variations in the exponents obtained
for 50 ensemble copies are small. Also in this case, variations
go down systematically when the number of data points are
increased from 1/2 to 3/2K. We consider just single realization
of each αin and perform DFA on the (50 realizations of) PRS
and get the surrogate fluctuation function. The DFA exponent α
values and their variations obtained from surrogate fluctuation
functions are shown in right side panels. Compared to scenario
1, the results obtained from PRS show less variations. For
lower exponents the variations in the local exponents are almost
the same for scenario 2 and the exponents obtained from
surrogate analysis (see the results for 3/2K). However, for
higher exponents, the exponents obtained from surrogates show
less variations compared to scenario 2. These results suggest
that the reliability of estimation of the exponents is increased
when the exponents are estimated from the ensemble averaged
fluctuation function. Further, from the error-bar shown in Fig. 3
(last column), it is clear that all the three different data lengths

the scaling exponent of the given data. For numerical data we
have an alternative way of synthesizing different (ensemble)
copies of the data and improve the reliability of the estimate.
For real life datasets, the chances of getting multiple copies of
the data are limited (see methodology section) and hence we
use surrogate analysis to estimate the exponent with reasonably
good reliability.

4. Application to fetal cardiac data

One of the convenient ways to understand the physiology
of the heart is by examining the time interval between the
successive cardiac cycles, often called the RR interval (time
intervals between the maximum wave (R) of the successive
cardiac cycles of the cardiogram). DFA has been applied to
RR intervals of (human adult) normal (α ∼ 1) and congestive
heart failure (CHF) (α ≥ 1.3) cases and shown to distinguish
between the two groups [2]. The primary conclusion of this
study is that normal heart beats display 1/ω like behavior
whereas the CHF cases display 1/ω2 (Brownian motion) like
behavior. However, in a recent study [8], using DFA by
analyzing the local exponents of the fluctuation function, it has
been shown that the normal group shows deviations from unity
at short time scales with αL > 1 and in the asymptotic regime
they tend to unity while the CHF group also shows deviations
26 R.B. Govindan et al. / P

Fig. 1. Log–Log plot of DFA2 fluctuation functions F(s) versus the scale size
correlated data with α ranging from 0.5 to 1.5 for three different lengths, 1/2K,
display almost the same degree of uncertainty, suggesting a
minimum of 1/2K data points would be sufficient to capture
sica D 226 (2007) 23–31

of the numerically simulated single realization of uncorrelated and long range
and 3/2K (1K = 1000 data points). Curves from bottom to top represent F(s)
from unity at short time scales but with αL < 1 and with two
characteristic scales in the intermediate and long term range.



R.B. Govindan et al. / Physica D 226 (2007) 23–31 27

Fig. 2. The variation of the local exponents αL with logarithm of the scale size s for three datasets with exponent α = 0.5, 1 and 1.5 for three different lengths
1/2K, 1K, and 3/2K. Results of the original data are shown in gray color and the results of the surrogate data are shown in black color. In each plot the mean
exponent expected for the dataset being plotted is shown as a dashed line as a guide to the eye.

Fig. 3. The fluctuation exponent α obtained from the local exponents versus the scaling exponent αin expected for the dataset, for three different data lengths. For
each input exponent αin, the α values obtained from the average F(s) of 15 ensemble copies are shown on the left and from 50 ensembles copies are shown in the

middle. For a single realization of each αin, the α values obtained from the averaged surrogate fluctuation function are shown on the right. Error-bars represent the
standard deviations (i.e.) variations of the local exponents αL in the asymptotic limit.



hy
28 R.B. Govindan et al. / P

Also in the same study [8], the authors have demonstrated the
existence of multiple cross-overs in the local exponents, for
the sleep and wake periods of a CHF subject, which are not
apparent in the fluctuation function F(s). As mentioned in the
introduction, DFA has also been applied to fetal RR intervals [9,
10] and shown that LRC in the fetal cardiac activity can be
retrieved with a reasonable accuracy even with intermediate
missing data (refer to [9] for details).

The dynamics of the fetal cardiac activity, in addition to the
intrinsic cardiac dynamics, is complicated by the behavioral
aspects of the fetus, like breathing, movements, sleep and
wake states, etc. [21]. A decade ago, recording fetal cardiac
activity (cardiogram) was a difficult task [22]. However,
with the development of modern technology and advent of
research in superconductors, it is now possible to record fetal
cardiograms using a Superconducting Quantum Interference
Device (SQUID). A device, called SARA (SQUID Array
for Reproductive Assessment), installed at UAMS has been
specifically designed to study maternal–fetal electrophysiology.
This instrument is completely non-invasive, and detects weak
biomagnetic fields associated with the electrophysiological
activity in the human body [23]. SARA is equipped with
151 primary magnetic sensors with an approximate distance
between the sensors of 3 cm and spread over an area of 850 cm2.
The sensor array spans the maternal abdomen longitudinally
from the symphysis pubis to the uterine fundus and a similar
distance laterally. As there are 151 sensors covering the entire
range of the maternal abdomen, it is possible to record fetal
cardiac activity with good quality even when the fetus changes
position. A combination of Independent Component Analysis
(ICA) and Hilbert transform (HT) (employing the multichannel
fetal Magnetocardiogram (fMCG) signals) have been proposed
recently [24] to extract the fetal RR intervals in a reliable way,
even when the cardiogram suffers due to fetal movement.

For this study we consider 36 pregnant women who
presented with healthy singleton pregnancies. This study was
approved by the UAMS Human Research Advisory Committee
and an informed consent was obtained from each subject.
In all subjects SARA recordings are made between 1 and 6
times during pregnancy at a regular interval of two weeks up
to the time of birth. Altogether, 126 recordings are obtained
between 27 and 40 weeks of gestation. Each recording lasted
for a minimum of 6 min to a maximum of 16 min based
on the comfort of the mother. All the signals are sampled at
312.5 Hz. The fMCG recorded by SARA are contaminated
by the maternal magnetocardiogram. The latter is removed
by signal space projection techniques [25,26]. The resulting
signals are bandpass filtered between 0.5 and 50 Hz using a 4-th
order Butterworth filter. Using the combination of ICA and HT
based approaches [24], fetal RR intervals are extracted from the
fMCG. Depending on the duration of the recording, the length
of the datasets ranged between 800 and 2250 beats (intervals)
(at the rate of approximately 142 beats/min).

The application of DFA2 to the RR intervals of a typical
fetus at six different gestation ages, 28–38 weeks with

an interval of 2 weeks, is shown in Fig. 4 where the
DFA2 fluctuation functions F(s) are plotted versus the scale
sica D 226 (2007) 23–31

size s in Log–Log representation (indicated as Original data).
The fluctuation functions display variations and cross-over
behaviors. The averaged surrogate fluctuation functions are also
shown in Fig. 4 (indicated as Surrogate data). These fluctuation
functions display little (or almost no visible) variations and the
cross-over behaviors are seen more clearly. In Fig. 5, we display
the variation of the local exponents αL obtained from the
fluctuation functions in Fig. 4, with the logarithm of the scale
function s. As seen for the numerically generated data (Fig. 2),
αL obtained for the RR intervals display large fluctuations
(gray color) while the exponents obtained from the surrogates
(black color) show less variations. At the earlier gestation ages
<34 weeks, the exponents (in the asymptotic regime) are (by
and large) less than 1 while for later gestation ages ≥34, the
exponents approach 1.3–1.5.

The variations of fluctuation exponent α with the gestation
age, for all the fetuses are shown in Fig. 6. The results obtained
for the surrogate datasets are also given in Fig. 6. We treat each
recording as an independent entity. The correlation (measured
by the linear correlation coefficient) between α and gestation
age along with its associated probability p are given in each
plot. There is a weak but statistically significant correlation
between α and gestation age for the exponents obtained from
surrogate datasets while the correlation is not significant for
the exponents obtained from original datasets. Based on the
results of the numerical datasets (that, as shown in Fig. 3, the
surrogate analysis improves the estimation of the exponents),
one would expect the surrogate dataset to capture the relation if
at all existing (though we do not have any hypothesis to claim
for a relation) between α and gestation age in a better way and
is indeed observed in Fig. 6. The positive correlation between
α and gestation age is in agreement with the scaling results of
the cardiac data of preterm infants in the conceptional weeks
between 30 and 50 weeks, reported elsewhere [27].

5. Conclusion

In earlier works [11,28], the DFA results of short biological
datasets are validated by comparing with the scaling analysis
of the artificial dataset of the same length and the same
correlation aspects (DFA exponent) as the original biological
data. In the present work we propose to perform DFA on several
realizations of PRS and estimate the fluctuation exponent from
the averaged surrogate fluctuation function. By applying this
approach to (single) realizations of numerical datasets we have
shown increased sensitivity of the current approach.

Application of this approach to the fetal RR intervals shows
that there is a weak (positive) correlation between α and
gestation age indicating that the correlation aspects of the data
increases (from α < 1 to α ∼ 1.2) with the maturation
of the fetus. In a cross-sectional study of fetal cardiac data
between 20 to 41 weeks of gestation, Echeverrı´a et al. [10]
have shown that below 24 weeks of gestation, the scaling
behavior is close to a white noise process while for above 24
weeks fetal cardiac data exhibit uniform power-law behavior

with α → 1. Based on the observations that many neuronal
developments take place during 22–26 weeks of gestation, and



R.B. Govindan et al. / Physica D 226 (2007) 23–31 29

Fig. 4. Log–Log plot of DFA2 fluctuation functions versus the scale function s of the RR intervals of a typical fetus in six different gestation ages. Curves from
bottom to top correspond to gestation ages 28–38 weeks with an interval of 2 weeks. The curves are shifted by a constant factor for the sake of clarity. The results
obtained for the original data are shown on the left side. The averaged surrogate fluctuation functions are shown on the right side. The solid lines on the right side
bottom corner and the left side top corner are guide to eye and correspond to α = 1 and 1.5, respectively.

Fig. 5. The variation of the local exponent αL with the logarithm of scale size s obtained from the fluctuation functions shown in Fig. 4. The results of the original
data are shown in gray color and the results of the surrogates are shown in black color. Three horizontal lines (from bottom to top) are to guide the eye and correspond

to αL = 0.5, 1 and 1.5.



hy
Fig. 6. The fluctuation exponent α for low-risk fetuses as a function of gestation age. Results obtained from the fluctuation functions of RR intervals are shown in
top panel. Results obtained from the averaged surrogate fluctuation functions are given in bottom panel. The linear correlation coefficient ρ between α and gestation
age is given in each plot. Also the probability associated with ρ under the hypothesis of no correlation between α and gestation age with the significance level of
0.05 is also given in the plots. There is a correlation between ρ and gestation age in both cases. However, the correlation is statistically significant (p < 0.05) for
the results obtained using surrogate analysis.

that evoked brain responses for given external stimuli have been
demonstrated in pre-term infants [29,30] and also during the
antenatal period [31], the manifestation of the scale invariance
of fetal cardiac data during the same period of 24 weeks has
been argued as being indicative of neuronal maturation of the
fetal nervous system [10]. In an another cross-sectional study of
cardiac data of preterm infants between 30 and 50 conceptional
weeks, Nakamura et al. [27] have shown a positive correlation
between α and conceptional week. This positive correlation has
been argued as being indicative of maturation of autonomic
nervous activity. Based on the above arguments the positive
correlation between α and gestation week in our datasets could
be related to the maturation of the neuronal system of the fetal
nervous system. In adults, day–night differences in the scaling
exponents has been reported elsewhere [32]. Also sleep–wake
transitions are shown to alter the scaling properties of cardiac
data [11]. As there is no strong evidence for sleep–wake
cycles in preterm infants below 36 weeks [10,33], the scaling
behaviour of α → 1 in the earlier gestation could be related
to fetal neuronal development. However, after 36 weeks, the
variations in the exponents may not be exactly attributable to
neuronal development as these variations may also be caused by
sleep–wake transitions [10]. A further investigation is needed

In a different cross-sectional study of fetal cardiac data [34],
the fractal nature at short time scales have been shown
to exhibit negative correlation with gestation age. Again
these observations are related to the development of input
mechanisms, such as baroreceptors, chemoreceptors, etc. [35].
Another, different study [36] uses a short-term intermittency
exponent (4–16 beats) derived from a multifractal analysis to
quantify the sharp transients in the fetal cardiac data. The
variation of this short-term exponent with gestation age has
been argued to be a milestone for maturation of heart rate
dynamics [36]. In our case we have not pursued the scaling
exponents at short time scales and this will be done in future
work.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by NIH grants 5R01-NS-36277-
05A1 and 5R33-EB-00978-02.

References

[1] C.-K. Peng, S.V. Buldyrev, A.L. Goldberger, S. Havlin, F. Sciortino,
M. Simon, H.E. Stanley, Long-range correlations in nucleotide sequences,
Nature 356 (1992) 168–170.

[2] C.-K. Peng, S. Havlin, H.E. Stanley, A.L. Goldberger, Quantification of
30 R.B. Govindan et al. / P
in this direction to understand the variations of α in the later
gestational age.
sica D 226 (2007) 23–31
scaling exponents and cross over phenomena in nonstationary heartbeat
time series, Chaos 5 (1995) 82–87.



R.B. Govindan et al. / Physica D 226 (2007) 23–31 31

[3] S. Thurner, M.C. Feurstein, M.C. Teich, Multiresolution wavelet analysis
of heartbeat intervals discriminates healthy and patients from those with
cardiac pathology, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 (1998) 1544–1547.

[4] S. Thurner, M.C. Feurstein, S.B. Lowen, M.C. Teich, Receiver-operating-
Characteristic analysis reveals superiority of scale-dependent wavelet and
spectral measures for assessing cardiac dysfunction, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81
(1998) 5688–5691.

[5] H. Kantz, T. Schreiber, in: B. Chirkov, P. Cvitanovic, F. Moss, H. Swinney
(Eds.), Nonlinear Time Series Analysis, Cambridge University Press, IK,
2002.

[6] N. Sapir, R. Karasik, S. Havlin, E. Simon, J.M. Hausdorff, Detecting
scaling in the period dynamics of multimodal signals: Application to
Parkinson tremor, Phys. Rev. E 67 (2003) 031903.

[7] D. Maraun, H. Rust, J. Timmer, Tempting long-memory — on the
interpretation of DFA results, Nonlinear Process. Geophys. 11 (2004)
495–503.

[

[

[

[

[
[

[

[

[

[

[20] K. Hu, P.Ch. Ivanov, Z. Chen, P. Carpena, H.E. Stanley, Effect of trends
on detrended fluctuation analysis, Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001) 011114.

[21] J.G. Nijhuis (Ed.), Fetal Behavior: Development and Perinatal Aspects,
Oxford University Press, NY, 1992.

[22] J.F. Pie´ri, J.A. Crowe, B.R. Hayers-Gill, C.J. Spencer, K. Bhogal,
D.K. James, Compact long-term recorder for the transabdominal foetal
and maternal electrocardiogram, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 39 (2001)
118–125.

[23] H. Eswaran, H. Preißl, J.D. Wilson, P. Murphy, C.L. Lowery,
First magnetomyographic recording of the uterine activity with
spatial–temporal resolution using 151 channel sensor array, Am. J. Obstet.
Gynecol. 187 (2002) 145–151.

[24] J.D. Wilson, R.B. Govindan, J.Q. Campbell, J.O. Hatton, C.L. Lowery,
H. Preißl, Integrated approach for fetal QRS detection (submitted for
publication).

[25] M. Samonas, M. Petrou, A.A. Ioannides, Identification and elimination

[8] J.C. Echeverrı´a, M.S. Woolfson, J.A. Crowe, B.R. Hayes-Gill, G.D.H.

Croaker, H. Vyas, Interpretation of heart rate variability via detrended
fluctuation analysis and αβ filter, Chaos 13 (2003) 467–475.

[9] J.C. Evheverrı´a, B.R. Hayes-Gill, J.A. Crowe, M.S. Woolfson, G.D.H.
Croaker, Detrended fluctuation analysis: A suitable method for studying
fetal heart rate variability? Physiol. Meas. 25 (2004) 763–774.

10] J.C. Echeverrı´a, M.S. Woolfson, J.A. Crowe, B.R. Hayes-Gill, J.F. Pie´ri,
C.J. Spencer, D.K. James, Does fractality in heart rate variability indicate
the development of fetal neural processes? Phys. Lett. A 331 (2004)
225–230.

11] A. Bunde, S. Havlin, J.W. Kantelhardt, T. Penzel, J.-H. Peter, K. Voigt,
Correlated and uncorrelated regions in heart-rate fluctuations during sleep,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 3736–3739.

12] J.W. Kantelhardt, Y. Ashkenazy, P.Ch. Ivanov, A. Bunde, S. Havlin,
T. Penzel, J.-H. Peter, H.E. Stanley, Characterization of sleep stages by
correlations in the magnitude and sign of heartbeat increments, Phys. Rev.
E. 65 (2002) 051908-1-6.

13] E. Koscielny Bunde, A. Bunde, S. Havlin, H.E. Roman, Y. Goldreich,
H.-J. Schellenhuber, Indication of a universal persistence law governing
atmospheric variability, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 729–732.

14] http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/dfa/citations.shtml.
15] J.W. Kantelhardt, E. Koscielny-Bunde, H.A. Rego, S. Havlin, A. Bunde,

Detecting long-range correlations with detrended fluctuation analysis,
Physica A 295 (2001) 441–454.

16] J. Theiler, A. Longtin, B. Galdrikian, D.D. Farmer, Testing for
nonlinearity in time series: The method of surrogate data, Physica D 58
(1992) 77–94.

17] T. Schreiber, A. Schmitz, Improved surrogate data for nonlinearity tests,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 (1996) 635–638.

18] T. Schreiber, A. Schmitz, Surrogate time series, Physica D 142 (2000)
346–382.

19] J. Timmer, M. Ko¨nig, On generating power law noise, Astron. Atrophys.
300 (1995) 707–710.
of cardiac contribution in single-trial magnetoencephalographic signals,
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 44 (1997) 386–393.

[26] J. Vrba, S.E. Robinson, J. Mccubbin, C.L. Lowery, H. Eswaran, J.D.
Wilson, P. Murphy, H. Preißl, Fetal MEG redistribution by projection
operators, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 51 (2004) 1207–1218.

[27] T. Nakamura, H. Horio, S. Miyashita, Y. Chiba, S. Sato, Identification of
development and autonomic nerve activity from heart rate variability in
preterm infants, Biosystems 79 (2005) 117–124.

[28] J.W. Kantelhardt, T. Penzel, S. Rostig, H.F. Becker, S. Havlin, A.
Bunde, Breathing during REM and non-REM sleep: Correlated versus
uncorrelated behaviour, Physica A 319 (2003) 447–457.

[29] L. Mrzljak, H.B.M. Uylings, I. Kostovic, C.G. van Eden, Prenatal
development of neurons in the human prefrontal cortex: I. A qualitative
Golgi study, J. Comp. Neurol. 271 (1988) 355–386.

[30] V. Glover, N.M. Fisk, Fetal pain: Implications for research and practice,
Br. J. Obstet. Gynaecol. 106 (1999) 881–886.

[31] H. Eswaran, J.D. Wilson, H. Preissl, S.E. Robinson, J. Vrba, P. Murphy,
D.F. Rose, C.L. Lowery, Magnetoencephalographic recordings of visual
evoked brain activity in the human fetus, Lancet 360 (2002) 779–780.

[32] P.C. Ivanov, A. Bunde, L.A.N. Amaral, S. Havlin, J. Fritsch-Yelle,
R.M. Baevsky, H.E. Stanley, A.L. Goldberger, Sleep–wake differences in
scaling behavior of human heartbeat: Analysis of terrestrial and long-term
space flight data, Europhys. Lett. 48 (1999) 594–600.

[33] F. Torres, C. Anderson, The normal EEG of the human newborn, J. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 2 (1985) 89–103.

[34] A. Kikuchi, N. Unno, T. Horikoshi, T. Shimizu, S. Kozuma, Y. Taketani,
Changes in fractal features of fetal heart rate during pregnancy, Early
Hum. Dev. 81 (2005) 655–661.

[35] P. Van Leeuwen, D. Geue, S. Lange, W. Hatzmann, D. Gro¨nemeyer,
Changes in the frequency power spectrum of fetal rate in the course of
pregnancy, Prenat. Diagn. 23 (2003) 909–916.

[36] M.K. Yum, J.H. Kim, A very-short-term intermittency of fetal heart rates
and developmental milestone, Pediatr. Res. 53 (2003) 915–919.



	Detrended fluctuation analysis of short datasets: An application to fetal cardiac data
	Introduction
	Methodology of DFA and surrogate analysis
	Application to uncorrelated and long range correlated data
	Application to fetal cardiac data
	Conclusion
	Acknowledgments
	References


