
PERGAMON 

MATHEMATICAL 
AND 
COMPUTER 
MODELLING 

Mathematical and Computer Modelling 35 (2002) 481-508 
www.elsevier.com/locate/mcm 

Synchron ized F low as a New Traffic Phase  and 
Re la ted  Prob lems for Traffic F low Mode l l ing  

B.  S. KERNER 
DaimlerChrysler AG, HPC: E224 

70546 Stuttgart, Germany 

Abst rac t - -An  empirical study of spatial-temporal features of traffic flow patterns is presented. 
A critical comparison of model results and results of traffic theories with real features of the traffic 
patterns is given. Predictable features of congested traffic flow are discussed. Results of an application 
of methods for the tracing and the prediction of moving traffic jams and of other spatial-temporal 
patterns in congested traffic are considered. A qualitative theory of congested traffic flow is discussed. 
~) 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. 

Keywords- -Traf f ic  flow patterns, Traffic flow models, Congested traffic, Synchronized flow, Wide 
moving jams. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

THE FUNDAMENTAL D IAGRAM 

Up to now, it is almost self-evident that both homogeneous and time independent solutions of a 
mathematical traffic flow model should belong to a curve on the flow-density plane which goes 
through the original and has at least one maximum. This curve is called the fundamental diagram 
for traffic flow (Figure la). It  represents the result of experimental observations that the higher 
the vehicle density in traffic flow, the lower the average vehicle speed (e.g., [1-44]). 

Recall that real traffic in empirical observations can be in either free or in congested regime. 
Empirical points measured at some location which corresponds to free flow can really be rep- 
resented by a curve on the flow density plane. This curve is cut off at some limit (maximum) 

point k~'max/'~(free),~max'~(free)hl (Figure lb). Congested traffic can be determined as states of traffic where 
the average vehicle speed is lower than the minimum possible speed which is related to this limit 
point [43]. It is well known that within congestion, the flow-density data do not form a neat re- 
lationship but show a broad and complex spreading of measurement points, i.e., the flow-density 
data cover a two-dimensional region in the flow-density plane (Figure lb) (e.g., [43,44]). This 
complexity in traffic flow is usually interpreted either as fluctuations, or as an instability, or else 
as a traffic jam formation. These features of real traffic flow should be explained by traffic models 

(e.g., [12-15,17-25,30-36,38-41]). 
The fundamental diagram will be called as the basic assumption (1) for traffic flow modelling. 

It is either a result of a traffic flow model or it is used in models explicitly (e.g., [1-41]). 

I would like to thank H. Rehborn, M. Aleksic, and S. Klenov for their help, the public authorities of Hessen for the 
support in the preparation of data and the German Ministry of Education and Research for the support within 
the project "SANDY". 

0895-7177/02/$ - see front matter (~ 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. Typeset by .Afl/~S-TE X 
PII: S0895-7177(01)00178-9 



482 B.S. KERNER 

/' 

free flow ~ congested flow 
q, flow rate q(vehicles/h) / '  

T A ...... ,,,,(free) .~'~1_ '~.  4, --. 
, ,  , " ,max-  . "  | / \ 12s04 .. 
! I \ I l .i 1'¢. ;~ '  ~ • , 

' p, density 0 '20~'4 '0 '60  p (v~m)  
p(free) 

max 

(a) Illustration of the fundamental (b) Real patterns which have 
diagram, been observed in different coun- 

tries (e.g., [43,44]). 

Figure 1. 

To show the mentioned complexity of traffic, in addition to the basic assumption (1), it is often 
proposed that a traffic flow model should have the following feature (it will be called the basic 
assumption (2)). There is a range of the vehicle density where initial hypothetical homogeneous 
and time independent solutions of the model are unstable with respect to infinitesimal pertur- 
bations (e.g., [12-15,17-25,30-36,38-41]). In other words, in this range of the vehicle density 
the related points of the fundamental diagram cannot exist in calculations and simulations of 
the model. Instead of these points, a complex spatial-temporal dynamics should be the model 
result (e.g., [12-15,17-25,30-36,38-41]). The mentioned instability should explain and predict 
results of observations that in congested traffic, a wide spreading of experimental points on the 
flow-density plane is usually realized, and the breakdown, hysteresis, and the "stop-and'go" phe- 
nomena occur (e.g., [12-15,17-25,30--36,38-41]). Either only the basic assumption (1) or both of 
the basic assumptions (1) and (2) are usually the basic assumptions of traffic flow models which 
claim to predict and explain real spatial-temporal behavior of traffic flow (see e.g., [12-15,17- 
25,30-36,38-41] and the references there). 

However, the recent empirical discovering of synchronized traffic flow as a new traffic flow phase 
by Kerner in collaboration with Rehborn [45] has cast doubt on both these basic assumptions 
of traffic flow models. In particular, empirical investigations allow us to suggest that there is no 
fundamental diagram which can describe hypothetical homogeneous states of synchronized flow. 
Besides, empirical investigations allow us to suggest that there are no unstable hypothetical ho- 
mogeneous and stationary states of traffic flow with respect to infinitesimal perturbations [46-49]. 
This may be the reason why traffic flow models and theories at present (see e.g., [1-19,21-32,34- 
37,39-41] and the references there) still cannot explain and predict important features of traffic 
flow patterns in congested regime which have been discovered recently [46-54]. In this paper, 
empirical features of traffic flow patterns in congested traffic are considered. Some hypotheses, 
i.e., new basic assumptions for a traffic flow theory by the author [46-49] are discussed. 

2. METASTABIL ITY  OF  FREE FLOW WITH 
RESPECT OF  MOVING JAM FORMATION 

Traffic flow dynamics is a very old field. Up to recent time, theoretical studying has mainly been 
based on an application and on a further development of such classical traffic models and theories 
as the Lighthill-Whitham-model [1], the Herman et al. car-following models [2,55], the Newell- 
model [3], the Prigogine kinetic model [4], the Payne macroscopic model [5], the Wiedemann 
psycho-physical model [6], the Gipps-model [7], different queuing models (e.g., [8,9]), and other 
theoretical approaches (see papers in [10,11]). 

In the past years, a wide community of physicists and mathematicians has been involved in a 
studying of the traffic flow dynamics [12-14,40,41]. On one hand, new traffic flow models and 



Synchronized Flow 483 

theoretical approaches, in particular, Nagel-Schreckenberg cellular automata model [15] and a 
new approach to the optimal velocity (OV) models [3,16] made by Bando et al. [15] have been 
proposed and developed. On the other hand, last results of the nonlinear physics of dissipative 
distributed systems, in particular, a theory of autosolitons (localized dissipative patterns) [56], 
have been applied by Kerner and Konh~user for a development of a nonlinear theory of moving 
traffic jams. In the frame of this theory, the following has been predicted [18]. 

(i) Wide moving jams possess some characteristics, i.e., unique, coherent, predictable, and 
reproducible parameters. Recall that a wide moving jam is an upstream moving localized 
structure which is restricted by two upstream moving fronts where the vehicle speed and 
the density change spatially sharply. The width of the wide moving jam in the longitudinal 
direction is considerably higher than the width of the jam's fronts. 

(ii) Free traffic flow is in a metastable state with respect to the jam emergence, if the flow rate 
in a free flow is higher than the flow rate in the outflow from a wide moving jam, qout. In 
this case, a wide moving jam can exist and be excited in this free flow. In contrast, if the 
flow rate in a free flow is lower than qout, then the free flow is stable with respect to the 
wide moving jam formation. Wide moving jams can neither exist for a long time nor be 
excited by a short time local perturbation in this free flow. Note that the characteristic 
flow rate qout is related to the case when free flow is formed in the outflow from a wide 
moving jam. 

These two results have indeed been found in empirical investigations of the jam propaga- 
tion [57,58]. Therefore, the mentioned Properties (i), (ii) of jams and free flows [18] can be con- 
sidered as necessary requirements for each traffic flow model [19,59]. Later studying by Bando 
et al. [20], by Kraufi et al. [21], by Barlovic et al. [22], by Helbing and Schreckenberg [23], by 
Treiber et al. [24], and by Mahnke and Kanpu~s [25] showed that there can be a lot of traffic flow 
models and theoretical approaches which ar@ able to reproduce Properties (i) and (ii) of moving 
jams and free flows which have first been found out from an investigation of a macroscopic traffic 
flow model in [18]. 

Note that the existence of the characteristics, i.e., unique, coherent, predictable, and repro- 
ducible parameters of wide moving jams has been used for a development of methods for tracing 
and prediction of moving traffic jams and time-dependent travel times [60-64]. These methods 
use essentially the fact that the velocities of the propagation of the moving jams' fronts can 
be calculated with the available measured traffic data. Besides, the methods work without any 
validations of model parameters at different highway infrastructure and other road conditions. 
Some results of the application of the methods [64-66] will be considered below. 

3. CONGESTED FLOW 

When the vehicle density is high enough, traffic is usually in a congested regime (e.g., [4,8- 
14,26-30,41]). Often congested flow is defined as a traffic state which occurs only due to a highway 
bottleneck as the inevitable consequence of an upstream flow that exceeds the downstream ca- 
pacity of the bottleneck. In this definition, it is obvious to propose that congested flow is not 
self-organizing, but rigidly controlled by external constraints. However, observations have shown 
that although bottlenecks are the most frequent reason, they are not the only reason for the 
occurrence of congested traffic [51]. Besides, in [45-51,57,58], it has been shown that different 
self-organizing processes are responsible for features of real traffic congestion. For these reasons, 
the mentioned definition of congested traffic will not be used in the paper. 

In the paper, phenomena will be defined through their features rather than through the reasons 
of their occurrence. Congested traffic states will be defined as counter states to states of free 
flow (e.g., [43]). It is well known that experimental points which are related to free flow can be 
approximately presented by a curve with a positive slope in the flow-density plane. Congested 
traffic will be determined, therefore, as a state of traffic where the average vehicle speed is lower 



484 B .S .  KERNER 

/,~(free) ,~(free) than the minimum possible speed which is related to the limit point ~max , tumax / in free flow 
(Figure lb) (e.g., [43,44]). In this definition, nothing is said about reasons of the occurrence 
of the congestion. It is linked to the mentioned experimental facts that a congested state can 
spontaneously occur also away from bottlenecks and that there are a lot of diverse self-organizing 
effects which are responsible for the congestion [45,49,50,57]. 

One of the well-known phenomena in congested traffic flow is the 'stop-and-go' phenomenon 
which has experimentally been studied by a lot of authors, in particular by Treiterer [42] and 
Koshi et al. [43]. Koshi et al. [43] found out that the vehicle speed across different highway 
lanes within the 'stop-and-go' waves can be synchronized. The synchronization of the vehicle 
speeds on different highway lanes is often observed in congested traffic away from bottlenecks 
and if only one route for traffic exists. It seems reasonable that in each state of congested flow, 
vehicles try to change to that lane for which the vehicle speed seems to be higher. This may 
increase the density on this lane and consequently decreases the vehicle speed, i.e., this process 
can synchronize the vehicle speed with the speeds on the other lanes leading to synchronized 
traffic flow. The tendency to equilibrate the speed across lanes in dense enough traffic flow can 
show almost any multilane traffic flow model. 

4. TWO PHASES IN CONGESTED TRAFFIC: 
WIDE MOVING JAMS AND SYNCHRONIZED FLOW 

4A. Objective Criteria for Different Phases in Congested Traffic 

It has already been mentioned that within congested traffic, the flow-density data do not form 
a neat relationship but show a broad and complex spreading of measurement points, i.e., the flow- 
density data cover a two-dimensional region in the flow-density plane (Figure lb) (e.g., [43,44]). 
In [45], it has been shown that if those data are removed from the data of the congested traffic 
where wide moving traffic jams are realized, nevertheless the remaining congested traffic data 
show a wide scattering within a two-dimensional area in the flow-density plane. This remain- 
ing congested traffic has been called "synchronized flow". Thus, the author suggested that in 
congested traffic, two different traffic phases should be distinguished, wide moving jams and syn- 
chronized flow [45,51]. Before the reasons for this suggestion will be considered, let us formulate 
an objective criterion for wide moving jams as a separate traffic phase in real congested traffic. 

Traffic is a complex nonlinear process where diverse spatial-temporal patterns occur. This 
process may be considered as a nonequilibrium process. It is well known that in a lot of nonequi- 
librium physical, chemical, and biological distributed systems, complex spatial-temporal patterns 
appear. A class of spatial-temporal patterns which possesses qualitative similar spatial-temporal 
features is usually considered a separate phase of a such nonequilibrium distributed system. Re- 
spectively, different classes of spatial-temporal patterns can be considered as different phases of 
the system. Phase transitions between these different phases of the system and also possible com- 
plex dynamics inside each of the phases determine the complexity of the system (e.g., [56,67]). 
To determine such a separate phase, there should be some objective criteria for this phase. These 
objective criteria should allow to distinguish such spatial-temporal features of the phase which 
are unique only for this phase. Besides, these unique spatial-temporal features should remain the 
same for this phase within the whole range of the control parameters of the system where the 
phase can occur and exist. 

This analogy with nonlinear nonequilibrium physical, chemical, and biological distributed sys- 
tems has been used by the author for a differentiation of the different phases in congested traffic. 
The related objective criteria for the identification of different traffic phases in congested regime 
are the following [45,46,52,53]. 

• A local spatial-temporal upstream moving traffic pattern in congested regime, i.e., the 
pattern which is spatially restricted by two upstream moving (downstream and upstream) 



Synchronized Flow 485 

fronts is a separate traffic phase "a wide moving jam", if the pattern possesses the following 
characteristic feature. The pattern as a whole local structure propagates through any 
other traffic states and through any other spatial-temporal patterns, and also through any 
bottlenecks (e.g., at on-ramps and off-ramps) keeping the mean velocity of the downstream 
front of the pattern. 

• All other states and spatial-temporal patterns in congested traffic which do not possess 
this characteristic feature belong to the traffic phase "synchronized flow". 

Indeed, only wide moving jams possess this characteristic feature [45-47,51,57]. For this reason, 
a wide moving jam has been distinguished in congested traffic as the separate traffic phase "wide 
moving jam". 

This behavior of wide moving jams can clearly be seen in Figure 2c, where the sequence of 
two wide jams propagates through at least three bottlenecks (in intersections I1, I2, and I3, 

FreewayA5-North ,09.10.1992 
traffic fl0w 

Oo o o 
-..L ix) co .~¢n o~ ,,,q G0 co ~ ~ ....,. _.~ ...a, 0 -~ PO (O.l~ 01 0) 

aBI"IB.  x  km) 
I I I I I I I ', ', I ', ', ', ', ', 

wide moving jams 
free flow wide moving jams 

x 

q~ 

(d) - -  D12-1eft - - -  D12-midd le  
.... D12-right 

q(veh./h) 
3000 

2000 

1000 

0 

13:30 14:30 15:30 

v(km/h) wide moving jams 
140 ~ 

70 

0 
13:30 14:30 15:30 

2 
downstream 
of synchro- 
I flow 

. . . . . . . . .  ,Am)  

(e) - -D6-1ef t  - - -D6-midd le  

q(veh./h) .... D6-r ight  

2000 ~ L , 

0 i i i i i i = 

13:30 14:30 15:30 
v(km/h) wide 

120 moving jams synchronized 
I I flow 

oo 

i 0 i i i i i i i 

13:30 14:30 15:30 

Figure 2. Explanation of traffic phases: free flow, wide moving jams, and synchro- 
nized flow (b)-(e) on a section of the highway A5-North (a) in Germany [52,57]. 



486 B.S. KERNER 

Figure 2a) and through different sometimes very complex states of synchronized flow (Figure 2e, 
bottom). In contrast to the wide moving jam, after synchronized flow has occurred at an on- 
ramp, the downstream front of the synchronized flow is fixed at the on-ramp. This effect is shown 
in Figure 2c. In this figure, the downstream front of the synchronized flow is shown by the dotted 
line. The location of this fixed downstream front determines the effective location of a bottleneck 
at the on-ramp [50]. Therefore, there are three traffic phases [45,46]: 

1. free flow, 
2. synchronized flow, 
3. a wide moving jam. 

4B. Traffic Phases in the Flow-Density Plane 
It has already been mentioned that for the identification of the traffic phases "a wide moving 

jam" and "synchronized flow" in congested traffic, a spatial-temporal analysis of traffic is nec- 
essary in general. This analysis must include a simultaneous measurement of traffic variables at 
different locations on a highway (e.g., Figure 2). After such a spatial-temporal study of traffic 
has been performed and the traffic phases have been distinguished, some features of the found 
traffic phases may be represented and in addition investigated in the flow-density plane. Such a 
representation of the three traffic phases in the flow-density plane is shown in Figure 3. In this 
figure, the stationary propagation of the downstream front of a wide moving jam is represented 
by the characteristic line for the downstream front which is called 'line J '  [45,57] (Figure 3, right). 
The slope of line J equals to the velocity of the downstream front of the wide moving jam. It 
should be noted that in the case shown in Figure 3, right, a synchronized flow is formed in the 
outflow from the wide moving jam. In this case, the flow rate at the point where the downstream 
jam front changes into the synchronized flow, qo (syn), is lower than the flow rate qout which occurs 
(at other detectors) when a free flow is formed downstream of the jam (Figure 3, right) [46,51]. 
A more detailed consideration of line J can be found in [46,53]. 

Freeway A5-North, 09.10.1992 

Free flow (F) Synchronized Wide moving jam (J) 
flow (S) 

-- left lane - - -  middle lane ..... right lane 
v [km/h] 
150 

100 • ~....: .: ~.,.,. .  , . .~  . , . ,  . .  

5o D9 

08:30 08:45 

v [km/h] v [kin/h] ,0o D ] ~  Ioo ;am D6 

50 50 ~ , ~ . .  

0 . . . . . . . . . . . .  0 . . . . . . .  
09:00 09:15 09:30 15:00 15:15 15:30 15:45 16:00 14:35 14:50 15:05 15:20 15:35 

q [vehicles/h] 
3000 "1 

el( free ) 1""7~" 
-'max ] /~- - -F  

,ooo 

o|: D9-1eft lane 
0 40 80 

p [vehicles/kin] 

q [vehicles/h] 
3000 -] ,,. 3000 

s q qyu I . . ,  
1ooo jl  ou (ot--  oo 

, 0 r D6-1eft lane o 
120 0 40 80 120 

p [vehicles&m] 

q [vehicles/hi 

40 80 120 
p [vehicles&ml 

Figure 3. Three phases of traffic in the flow-density plane. 



Synchronized Flow 487 

4C. Features of Wide Moving Jams 

From the mentioned objective criterion for wide moving jams, it follows that independent 
from the state of traffic in the outflow from a wide moving jam, the velocity of the downstream 
jam front is the characteristic, i.e., unique, coherent, predictable, and reproducible parameter. To 
explain this, note that the moving of the downstream front of a wide moving jam is a deterministic 
process of driver's escaping from the jam. The velocity vg of this process is determined by the 
density Pma× inside the jam and by the an average delay time Tdel between two vehicles following 
one another escaping from the jam [68]: 

1 
Vg - . (1) 

PmaxTdel 

The vehicle speed and the flow rate inside a wide moving jam are either zero or negligible for the 
jam propagation. In other words, it can be suggested that each vehicle inside the jam is at least 
once in a stop during a time-interval very large in comparison with 7del- Therefore, the related 
average "stop time" Tstop satisfies the condition 

Tstop ~ Tdel. (2) 

This suggestion also means that there is no influence of the inflow into the jam on the jam's 
outflow. A wide moving jam separates the traffic flows upstream and downstream of the jam. 
No states of synchronized flow possesses the feature of wide moving jams (2). 

4D. Spatial-Temporal Patterns of Synchronized Flow 

Note that a spatial-temporal pattern consisting only of the traffic phase "synchronized flow" as 
well the pattern '% wide moving jam" is sometimes also localized spatially. There are downstream 
and upstream fronts (boundaries) of the spatial-temporal pattern of synchronized flow where the 
vehicle speed and the density spatially sharply change. The downstream front of the pattern of 
synchronized flow separates synchronized flow upstream and free flow downstream. The upstream 
front of the pattern synchronized flow separates the synchronized flow downstream either from free 
flow o1" from a wide moving jam upstream. In contrast to a wide moving jam whose downstream 
front propagates upstream stationary, after a synchronized flow has occurred at an on-ramp (or 
at another bottleneck), the downstream front of the pattern the synchronized flow is always f i xed  
at the bottleneck. Also, in contrast to the wide moving jam whose upstream front propagates 
upstream continuously, the upstream propagation of the upstream front of the synchronized flow 
often has a spatial limit. 

4E. Examples of Differentiation of Traffic Phases 

These differences in the mentioned spatial-temporal features of wide moving jams and patterns 
of synchronized flow are illustrated in some examples of traffic flow spatial-temporal patterns in 
Figure 4. In these examples, results of local simultaneous measurements of the vehicle speed (left) 
and the flow rate (right) at different locations are shown in time and in space. Figures 4b-4d 
are related to the section of the highway A5-South which schematic configuration is shown in 
Figure 4a. Each induction double loop detector (see the sets of the detectors D1 . . . . .  D24 in 
Figure 4a) records the crossing of a vehicle and measures its speed. A local road computer 
calculates the flow rate and the average vehicle speed in one minute intervals. 

The section has three bottlenecks which effective locations are marked as "BI", "B2", and 
"B3" in Figures 4b-4d. The effective bottleneck "BI" is linked to the off-ramp at the d~tectors 
D23-off. If too many vehicles would like to leave the highway to the off-ramp either the phase 
transition from free flow to a wide moving jam (it will be called as the ' F  ~ J'-transition) or to 
synchronized flow (it will be called as the 'F --* S'-transition) occurs. The effective location of 



488 B .S .  KERNER 

(a) A5-South 

traffic flow p 

, I , .~  , , .  , , , ', : ', . :  : ' , . ' ,  ', : : ', ', ' , ' , :  ; 
- , .  . . . . . . . . . . .  - - -  ~ . . . .  (k • ~ ~ ~ - ~ ~, .,. ,.~ = ~ ~ ~ - ~ .~x m) o ~ i~ ,.' :~ i~ , i~ ~ ~,, .' b* ~,,i-~ ~. :~ :~ ' ~* "~.~" 

/" "',, : , 

D i ~ l .o f f .2~'x  /%//~ DI 5-on-3 
DS-on D6-off " -D I3 -o f f - I  / / D IS-on-2 

D I5 -on . l  

(b) A5-South, 23.06.1998 Moving jam 
I 
i 

i zed  fl( 

Moving jam 

B l 

2 

t ime 1~00 O x p~tl] 

(c) A5-South, 18.06.1997 

F---->; 
indt 
syn~ B" 

24 

t ime 1@00 

Moving jam "A" Moving jam "B" 

10:00  * '~o x lXml  

B, 

(d) A5-South, 17.03.1997 

:24 

B, 
2 

Figure 4. An overview of traffic patterns on three different days observed on the 
section of the highway A5-South (a): (b)-(d) dependencies of the average (across all 
lanes) vehicle speed (left) and the total flow rate across the highway (right) on t ime 
and space. 

the bott leneck "Bfl' is at about 23.4km. The effective bott leneck "B2" is l inked to the on-ramp 

at the detectors D16. The effective location of this bottleneck is at about  17.1 km. The effective 

bott leneck "S3" is linked to the on-ramp at the detectors D6. The effective location of this 

bott leneck is at about 6.4 km. 



Synchronized Flow 489 

To emphasize the qualitative difference between the traffic phase "a wide moving jam" and the 
traffic phase "synchronized flow", let us first consider Figure 4b. It can be seen that a moving 
jam first emerges in the vicinity of the bottleneck "BI". The physics of this 'F --* J'-transition 
has been considered in [54]. The jam propagates further through the whole highway section, 
where two other bottlenecks "B2" and "B3" exist, keeping the velocity of the downstream front 
of the jam. Therefore, this traffic pattern belongs to the traffic phase "a wide moving jam". 
Propagating near the effective location of the bottleneck "B2", the wide moving jam causes the 
'F --* S'-transition at the on-ramp at D16 (at x ~ 17.1 km). Indeed, the spatial-temporal pattern 
which appears upstream of the bottleneck "B2" is further localized upstream of the bottleneck. 
The downstream front of this pattern is fixed at the bottleneck. The upstream front of the 
pattern is also located at some distance upstream of the bottleneck. Therefore, this pattern 
does not possess the characteristic feature of wide moving jams. As a result, correspondingly to 
the criteria mentioned above this pattern is a spatial-temporal pattern of synchronized flow (in 
Figure 4b the pattern is marked as "pattern of synchronized flow"). 

The other two examples in Figures 4c and 4d show some more complex patterns. However, 
the traffic phases "a wide moving jam" and "synchronized flow" can also easily be distinguished 
from one another. For example, two wide moving jams which are marked as moving jam "A" 
and moving jam "B" in Figure 4c can be considered. The moving jam "A" propagates through 
the bottleneck "B3" and through complex pattern of synchronized flow which is formed at this 
bottleneck keeping the velocity of the jam downstream front. The same conclusion can be drawn 
from the propagation of the moving jam "B" through the bottlenecks "B2" and "B3" and also 
through complex patterns of synchronized flow at these bottlenecks. Therefore, the moving jams 
"A" and "B" belong to the traffic phase "a wide moving jam". In both cases, upstream of 
each of the bottlenecks "BI", "B2", and "B3" spatial-temporal patterns which do not possess 
the characteristic feature of wide moving jams occur. The downstream fronts of each of these 
patterns are fixed at the related bottlenecks. Therefore, they all belong to the traffic phase 
"synchronized flow". 

5. PHASE TRANSIT IONS 

Due to the existence of three traffic phases, there are three different types of phase transitions 
in traffic [50]: 

(1) 'free flow ~-~ jam', 

(2) 'free flow ~ synchronized flow', 

(3) 'synchronized flow ~ jam(s)' which will be called as the 'S ~ J'-transitions. 

Observations show that all of these phase transitions are local first-order phase transitions [50]. 
This means that these transitions are accompanied by sometimes similar looking breakdown, 
hysteresis, and nucleation effects. However, it must be distinguished between them because 
the nonlinear features of these phase transitions are qualitatively different. This differentiation 
determines one of the main difficulties in the understanding of the observations and of the traffic 
flow theory. 

/ (free) (free)\ Recently, Kerner found out that the existence of the limit point in free flow ~qm~x , pm~x ) 
(Figure lb) is linked to the F --* S-transition rather than the F ~ J-transition [49,51]. As a 
consequence, it turns out that the cascade of two phase transitions 'free flow --* synchronized flow' 
--* wide moving jam(s)' (it will be called as the 'F --* S --* J '  transitions) is usually responsible 
for the jam emergence in free traffic flow [51]. 

Thus, the F --* S-transition is the most frequent phase transition in free flow. Because this 
transition is the local first-order one, each local perturbation whose amplitude exceeds some crit- 
ical amplitude should cause this transition (the nucleation effect). Obviously, if these conclusions 
are correct, then the F --* S-transition and the effect of self-maintaining of synchronized flow 



490 B.S. KERNER 

mu~t occur and show qualitatively the same features in all following cases when for example the 
F ~ S-transition occurs at an on-ramp. 

(1) When a random local fluctuation whose amplitude exceeds the critical amplitude occurs in 
the vicinity of the on-ramp in an initial free flow (the F ~ S-transition at the bottleneck 
"B3" in Figure 4d). This phase transition is shown in more detailed in Figure 5a. 

(2) When an upstream moving jam which has initially occurred far enough downstream of 
the on-ramp reaches the on-ramp, and besides the F --~ S-transition can occur in the 
initial free flow (the F -~ S-transition induced by moving jam at the bottleneck "B2" in 
Figure 4b). Indeed, in this case the moving jam plays a role of the local perturbation (a 
nucleus for the F ~ S-transition) of the highest possible amplitude. 

(3) When a localized region of synchronized flow propagating upstream which has initially 
occurred far enough downstream of the on-ramp reaches the on-ramp, and nearby the 
F ~ S-transition can occur in the initial free flow at the on-ramp (the F ~ S-transition 
induced by synchronized flow at the bottleneck "B3" in Figure 4c). Also in this case the 
localized region of synchronized flow plays the role of a nucleus for the phase transition. 

Case (1) is related to a random (spontaneous) F -~ S-transition and Cases (2) and (3) are induced 
F ~ S-transitions. Figure 4b-4d show that all these cases really occur in real traffic flow. After 
the F ~ S-transition has occurred, the behavior of synchronized flow which is self-maintained 
at the on-ramp is qualitatively the same in all these cases (Figures 4b-4d). This confirms the 
conclusions made in [50]. 

6. COMMON FEATURES OF SPATIAL-TEMPORAL 
TRAFFIC PATTERNS AT BOTTLENECKS 

Spatial-temporal traffic patterns can occur away from bottlenecks [47,51]. However, just as 
defects and impurities are important in physical systems, so are bottlenecks, such as on- and off- 
ramps, in traffic flow. Observations show that a bottleneck can trigger phase transitions, which 
is why spatial-temporal traffic patterns are considerably more likely to form near the bottleneck. 
It can been supposed that the probability of the F ~ S-transition has a maximum at a so-called 
effective location of the bottleneck [52]. 

6A. Genera l  Pat tern  at I so lated Bot t leneck  

Let us first consider a bottleneck on a highway which is located far enough from other bot- 
tlenecks, so that the effects at other bottlenecks of the highway do not influence the pattern 
formation and the pattern's features at the bottleneck. Such a bottleneck will be called an iso- 
lated bottleneck. After the F -~ S-transition at the isolated bottleneck has occurred, a spatial- 
temporal traffic pattern is formed upstream of the isolated bottleneck. This pattern will be called 
as the general pattern at an isolated bottleneck. Empirical investigations of the general pattern 
which have been made in [51,52] allow us to suggest the following common features of a lot of 
the general patterns at an isolated bottleneck. 

(i) The general pattern consists often of two parts. 
(1) The pattern which consists only of synchronized flow (the region of synchronized flow 

in Figure 6a). 
(2) The pattern which consists of an alternation of wide moving jams (the region of wide 

moving jams in Figure 6a). 
(ii) The spatial-temporal pattern of synchronized flow (the region of synchronized flow in 

Figure 6a) consists of two parts. 
(1) A region of synchronized flow where no moving narrow jams are formed (in Figure 6a, 

the width of this part is Rs). 
(2) The pinch region in synchronized flow, i.e, the region where narrow moving jams 

emerge (in Figure 6a, the width of this part is Rps). 



Synchronized Flow 491 

(a) A5-South, 17.03.1997 
FtE S-transition pinch region pinch region . . • ~ moving jams IAi 

Stop-and-G ~ ~ o  ", ,~t~l l l lm~ /moving jams lhi ~,; ..... and lB i /  
ffaffic t~f~c\ ~ J j~ J i~  .... \ , l  

7o1 '1o £3000  "1o 
> U 

. '  8: °L'- :qMIV - 
7:oo '~ .~r  • / 5 - 7:oo "-L~r~v. 5 

8".00 '~'~w. ./ . . . . .  8:00 '~-~ .. . 
t ime 9:20"0 x tKml t ime g:20~O x [kin] 

(b )  A5-South, 17.03.1997, - -  leftlane - -  - middlelane • • • rightlane 

40 40 '~ ' " 
• iop  

0 I q I '1 I 0 

06:30 07:10 07:50 08:30 09:10 06:30 07:10 07:50 08:30 09:10 

80 80 rv,- 

40 , 40 :51 

o11° 37 i°ff 7 o 
06:30 07:10 07:50 08:30 09:10 06:30 07:10 07:50 08:30 09:10 

120 A B 
80 D5 120 

80 

40 [ 4 ' o8:52 40 
0 0 

06:30 07:10 07:50 08:30 09:10 06:30 07:10 07:50 08:30 09:10 

( c ) A5-South, 17.03.1997 

f low rate [vehic les/h]  
3000- .  ...................... : 

qou~ 
1500 - 

: D6-1eft lane 

0 Pmin I n(frce) I 
0 25 rmax 50 

density [vehicles/km] 

Figure 5. I l lustration of common features of spatial-temporal patterns of synchronized flow [45,46,50,51]. (a),(b) 
Overview of the following spatial-temporal phenomena: (i) the F --* S-transit ion at the on-ramp at D6 (solid up 
arrow, D6, (b)); (ii) the propagation of synchronized flow upstream (solid up arrows at D5-D3, (b)); (iii) the 
pinch effect in synchronized flow ((a), (b), D5, and D4); (iv) the emergence of narrow jams in the pinch region 
(D5-D3,  (b)); (v) the transformation of the narrow jams into wide moving jams, i.e., the S --* J - t ransi t ions (D1, 
(b)); (vi) the return S --* F-transit ion (dotted up arrows at D1-D6);  (vii) the propagation of wide traffic jams 
through free flow (the jams "A" and "B", down arrows at DT) and through different states of synchronized flow 
(D6-D3,  (b)). (a) Dependencies of the average (across all lanes) vehicle speed (left) and the total  flow rate across 
the highway (right) on t ime and space. (b) Dependencies of the vehicle speed for each lane on t ime at different 
detectors. (c) Traffic phases in the flow-density plane: free flow (black points), synchronized flow (circles) and a 
part  of line J. Arrows in (c) are related to the F --* S-transit ion (at t ~ 06 : 37, compare with (b), D6) and the 
return S -* F-transi t ion (at t ~ 08 : 57, (c), D6). 



492 B. S. KERNER 

direction of flow effective location 
)" of the bottleneck 

wide moving . . . .  (downgtream front 

(a) 

(b) 

i Rw~u ! R ~ Rs j  ~. ,I ~" PS I, r; 
free flow region of wide "~ pinch region free flow 

moving jams ...(narrow moving jams) _.. 
v 

synchronized flow 

upstream front of effective location 
direction of flow gvnchronized flow of the bottleneck 

i R :Rs : :  
free flow pinch region free flow 

(narrow moving jams) 

synchronized flow 

direction of flow upstream front of effective location 
synchronized flow of the bottleneck 

X 

X 

(c) 

: R s i x 1 
free flow free flow 

synchronized flow 

Figure 6. Schematic illustration of the spatial structure of traffic flow patterns at 
an isolated bottleneck [51,52,62]. (a) The general pattern, (b) the synchronized flow 
pattern (SP) of Type 1, (c) (SP) of Type 2. 

(iii) The downstream front (boundary) of the pattern of synchronized flow (this front is also 
the downstream front of the general pattern as a whole pattern) is located at the effective 
location of the bottleneck (Figure 6a). 

(iv) The upstream boundary of synchronized flow is determined by the location where a narrow 
moving jam is just transformed into a wide moving jam. At this place, the S ---* J- 
transition has occurred. Because the transformation of different narrow moving jams 
into wide moving jams can occur at slightly different locations, the upstream boundary 
(front) of synchronized flow performs complex spatial oscillations over time. However, 
these oscillations have usually relatively small amplitude in comparison with the mean 
length of the pinch region Lpinch. 

(v) The successive process of the transformation of narrow moving jams into wide moving 
jams at the upstream boundary (front) of synchronized flow leads to the formation of 
a sequence of wide moving jams. The sequence of wide moving jams (a "stop-and-go" 
pattern) may propagate far away from the location where the wide moving jams have first 
initially been formed (i.e., from the upstream front of synchronized flow). 

A narrow moving jam may be considered as a nucleus of the traffic phase "wide moving jam" 
inside the traffic phase "synchronized flow". At the upstream boundary (front) of synchronized 



Synchronized Flow 493 

flow where a narrow moving jam has just transformed into a wide moving jam is also the location 
of the S --* J-transition. 

Items (i)-(v) are illustrated in Figures 5a and 5b, where the pattern which has occurred 
upstream of the on-ramp at D6 is shown. This example is qualitatively the same as well as the 
case of the pattern observed on 13.01.1997 which has been considered in [51]. 

6B. "Foreign" Wide Moving Jams 

The only difference to the case observed on 13.01.1997 [51] is that in the case in Figure 5a 
and 5b, two other wide moving jams (moving jams "A" and "B" in Figures 5a and 5b) which 
have initially occurred downstream of the effective location of the bottleneck at the on-ramp 
D6 propagate through the pattern under consideration. Such wide moving jams (moving jams 
"A" and "B") will be called "foreign" wide moving jams in comparison with the wide moving 
jams which are formed at the upstream front of the synchronized flow inside the pattern under 
consideration due to the transformation of narrow moving jams into wide moving jams (Item (v)). 
Thus, until these two "foreign" wide moving jams "A" and "B" do not reach the bottleneck B3, 
this bottleneck B3 can be considered as an isolated one. In the latter case, the features of the 
pattern at the on-ramp D6 (Figures 5a and 5b) are related to the features of the general pattern 
in Items (i)-(v) above [51]. See also the explanation in the caption in Figure 5. 

6C. Synchronized Flow Pattern at Isolated Bottleneck 

There are cases when instead of the general pattern at the isolated bottleneck shown in Fig- 
ure 6a, some synchronized flow patterns, or (SP) for short, are observed (Figures 6b and 6c). 
There are two types of such (SP): 

(i) Type 1, and 
(ii) Type 2. 

In (SP) of Type 1, the region of wide moving jams does not occur at the upstream boundary of 
the synchronized flow, i.e., this pattern consists only of the pattern of synchronized flow where 
the pinch region is formed. In (SP) of Type 2, the pinch region and the region of wide moving 
jams do not occur at the upstream boundary of the synchronized flow. 

A qualitative explanation of (SP) of Type 1 may be the following. Let the flow rate upstream of 
the pattern be lower than qout. Then, upstream of the upstream front (boundary) of synchronized 
flow, wide moving jams disappear over time. Such situations can occur if at some distance 
upstream of the effective location of a bottleneck, a large enough percentage of vehicles leave 
the highway to an off-ramp. This situation is realized in the case shown in Figure 4b for (SP) 
which is formed at the bottleneck B2 (this pattern is marked as "pattern of synchronized flow" 
in Figure 4b). 

7. "EXPANDED" SPATIAL-TEMPORAL 
TRAFFIC FLOW PATTERNS 

A real highway has a lot of bottlenecks. Therefore, it can occur that two or more different sepa- 
rated pinch regions upstream of different highway bottlenecks can appear almost simultaneously. 
In this case, it can be expected that a complex dynamics of the jams' interaction may occur when 
some wide moving jams from the downstream sequence of moving jams due to their upstream 
propagation reach the upstream pinch region where narrow moving jams are just emerging [53]. 
Recall that such wide moving jams from the downstream sequence of the jams have been called 
above as "foreign" wide moving jams. 

Examples of such cases are shown in Figures 4c and 4d and Figures 5a and 5b. In Figure 4c, 
the wide moving jam "A" which has initially occurred upstream of the bottleneck B2 and the 
wide moving jam "B" which has initially occurred upstream of the bottleneck B1 are "foreign" 



494 B.S. KERNER 

wide moving jams for the pattern occurred upstream of the bottleneck B3. Indeed, both wide 
moving jams "A" and "B" propagate through the pinch region (upstream of the bottleneck B3) 
where narrow moving jams are just emerging. Qualitatively, the same situation is shown in 
Figure 5b where two "foreign" wide moving jams "A" and "B" propagate through the pattern 
occurred upstream of the bottleneck B3 where narrow moving jams are just emerging. As a result 
of the propagation of "foreign" wide moving jams instead of different sequence of moving jams 
which have initially occurred at different spatial separated bottlenecks, a united sequence of wide 
moving jams can be formed [53]. 

A much more complicated case can occur, if two or more effective locations of different bottle- 
necks exist on a highway very close one to another. To explain this important case, consider an 
effective location of a bottleneck on a highway where a spatial-temporal pattern first occurs. Let 
us assume that downstream of this "first" bottleneck a free flow is realized, i.e., the downstream 
front of the pattern is located at the bottleneck during the whole time under consideration. Let 
us further assume that the upstream boundary (front) of synchronized flow in this pattern reaches 
the effective location of the next (second) upstream bottleneck on the highway. In this case, it 
can occur that the upstream boundary (front) of synchronized flow propagates further upstream 
of the second bottleneck. The spatial-temporal pattern which occurs in this case will be called 
an "e:~panded" pattern. 

An empirical example of an "expanded" pattern which occurred on the section of the highway 
A5-North is shown in Figures 7a-7c. The section has at least three bottlenecks "BNorthl", 
"BNorth2" , and "BNorth3" (Figure 7b). The bottleneck "BNorthl" may be linked to a curve and 
a gradient on the highway (a bottleneck without obvious reason) in the vicinity of the detectors 
D18 (x ~ 15.5 kin). The bottleneck "BNorth2" is linked to the on-ramp at the detectors D16 (x 
13.1 km). The bottleneck "BNorth3" is linked to the on-ramp at the detectors D7 (x ~ 5.2km). 
First, the F ~ S-transition occurs at the bottleneck "BNorthl" (up-arrow in Figure 7c, D18). 
Then a spatial-temporal pattern begins to form upstream of bottleneck "BNorthl" (Figures 7b and 
7c, D17). After the upstream front (boundary) of the synchronized flow in this pattern reaches the 
bottleneck "BNorth2" (Figure 7b and 7c, D16), this upstream front propagates further upstream. 
In the "expanded" pattern in Figures 7b and 7c, the region of synchronized flow expands at least 
over the bottleneck "BNorth2". In this "expanded" pattern, wide moving jams can already occur 
downstream of the bottleneck "BNorth2" because a part of the pinch region has been formed 
between the bottleneck "BNorthl" and the bottleneck "BNorth2" (Figure 7b). These wide moving 
jams which propagate further upstream can be considered as "foreign" jams for another part of 
the pinch region upstream of the bottleneck "BNorth2" where other narrow moving jams emerge. 

Therefore, the "expanded" pattern can have qualitatively similar spatial-temporal structure as 
well the general pattern on an isolated bottleneck shown in Figure 6. However, there are some 
important peculiarities of "expanded" patterns. First, in an "expanded" pattern, the pinch region 
can be much longer than in the case of an isolated bottleneck (many of tens or even hundreds 
kilometer). Indeed, the pinch region in the "expanded" pattern can cover a lot of bottlenecks. 
Symbolically, this effect is shown by effective locations of bottlenecks B2 . . . . .  Bn in Figure 7d 
which all are covered by the pinch region. It must be noted that this pinch region has initially 
begun to form upstream of the bottleneck B1. Second, a lot of "foreign" wide moving jams which 
are formed inside different parts of the pinch region between different bottlenecks can propagate 
through the "expanded" pattern (symbolically this effect is shown in Figure 7d). 

8. COMPARISON OF EXPERIMENTAL  FEATURES 
OF TRAFF IC  PATTERNS WITH MODEL RESULTS 

It has already been noted (see Section 2) that the model results about the existence of the 
characteristic, i.e., predictable and reproducible parameters of wide moving traffic jams and that 
states of a free flow are metastable states if the flow rate in the free flow exceeds qout (first 



Synchronized Flow 495 

(a)  A5-North ¢ramc flow 

/ l  t t  I I I I I I t I I  I I I I I I I I I I I I I .... / i / 

B Nor th  I 

: '. 

16:00 '~"--. . . '5 
time 19:00 0 x [km] 

(c )  A5-North, 21.06.1996, - -  left lane 

v [km]h] 
120 
80 
40 ,  D19 
0 I 

12:40 13:10 13:40 
v [krrgh] 

120 ~ 
80 
40 

0 I ~ I I 

12:40 13:10 13:40 
v [km/h] 

120 ~ 
80 
40 

01 '  'h  I 

12:40 13:10 13:40 

(b)  AS-North, 21.06.1996 

~°~~ o 
% 2 : o o " ~ - ~  . 15 

lO 

lime 19:00 × [kin] 

- - -  middle lane ..... right lane 

v [km/h] 
120 ~ Dl6 
40 * 

0 ' ' 

12:40 13:10 13:40 
v [km/h] 

120 • 

40 
0 ,, j , , ,  j 

12:40 13:10 13:40 
v [kr rgh]  

120 " • D14 

40 

0 , , ,  I i 

12:40 13:10 13:40 

wide mm w 
m. 

(d) 

up= 
synchronized flow ~e . . . . . . . .  c= .... , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5J ...... , _.,, Jree now 

| L I III 

synchronized flow 

Figure 7. Illustration of features of "expanded" spatial-temporal patterns [62], 
(a) Schematic picture of the section of the highway A5-North, (b) overview of an 
empirical "expanded" spatial-temporal pattern which has initially occurred at the ef- 
fective location of the bottleneck BNorthl and later expands over two other upstream 
bottlenecks BNorth2 and BNorth3, (C) dependencies of the average vehicle speed at 
different detectors. (d) Schematic illustration of a spatial structure of "expanded" 
traffic flow patterns. The up-arrow in (a) symbolically shows the F --~ S-transition 
which occurs at the effective bottleneck BNorthl in the vicinity of the detectors D18 
probably due to the curve and the gradient on the highway at this place. 



496 B.S. KERNER 

predicted in [18]) have indeed been discovered in empirical investigations [57]. These results can 
be obtained from a mathematical consideration of traffic as a system which consists of only free 
flow and moving jams. For an analysis of such traffic, the basic assumptions (1) and (2) which 
have been considered in the introduction can be used. 

However, there are other important empirical results which are linked to the features of spatial- 
temporal patterns of synchronized flow considered above which apparently cannot be explained in 
the frame of the basic assumptions (1) and (2). For this reason, the author questioned the basic 
assumptions (1) and (2) of traffic flow models at present [53,54]. These empirical results [45,49,51- 
54] are as follows. 

(1) Either at on-ramps or away from bottlenecks, the F ~ J-transition has never been 
observed, wide moving jam(s) emerge only due to the F ~ S ~ J-transitions. Therefore, 

~(free) ,,(free)~ (Figure la) is linked to the F ~ S-transition the limit point of free flow I.p'max , t/max ] 
rather than to the F ~ J-transition. 

(2) Synchronized flow of Types (i) and (ii) [45] can exist on a highway for a long time, i.e., it 
can be stable at least with respect to small amplitude perturbations. 

~bottle in the (3) After the F ~ S-transition has occurred at an on-ramp, the flow rate ~out 
outflow from the downstream boundary of synchronized flow (i.e., the boundary where 
synchronized flow is transferred into free flow downstream) can change in a very wide 
range. Besides, this discharge flow ra te  qbottle can considerably exceed the flow rate out 
from a wide jam, qout (Figure 5c). 

9. PREDICTABLE FEATURES OF TRAFFIC 
FLOW PATTERNS IN CONGESTED TRAFFIC.  

METHODS FOR TRAFFIC FORECASTING 

It must be noted that traffic forecasting based on an application of different dynamic traffic 
flow models whose parameters should be validated corresponding to real traffic conditions is the 
well-known approach (e.g., [28]). However, due to very complex dynamics of real traffic flow 
which strongly depend on the infrastructure of a highway, weather, etc., it is difficult to choose a 
set of model parameters in a way that the model shows results compatible with real traffic flow. 

It has already been stressed that the downstream front of a wide moving jam possesses some 
characteristics, i.e., predictable and reproducible parameters which do not depend on initial 
conditions and on time and are also the same for different wide moving jams. Recall that the 
velocity of the downstream front of a wide moving jam is always the characteristic parameter 
independent of the traffic p, arameters downstream from the jam [51,59]. The latter property 
allows us to make a predict!on of ~he propagation of wide moving jams without any validating 
of model parameters from available traffic ~ata [60]: Similar conclusion can be made for some 
important spatial-temporal features of patterns of synchronized flow [45,50,61,62]. 

Based on these empirical discoveries, Kerner et al. [60-62] have proposed an alternative ap- 
proach to a traffic prediction in contrast to the modelling approach mentioned above (e.g., [28] 
and references there). In [60-62], the features of traffic patterns are determined experimentally 
and then used for a tracing and prediction of macroscopic properties of the traffic patterns with- 
out any validation of model parameters. In this approach [60-62], macroscopic parameters of 
spatial-temporal traffic patterns based on traffic measurements are determined first. An example 
of these macroscopic parameters is the velocity of the fronts of moving jams. The second step is 
to determine, also based on traffic measurements, the characteristic features of spatial-temporal 
dynamics of these macroscopic parameters of the pattern as functions of traffic flow rate, average 
speed, and infrastructure peculiarities. In particular, the conditions for the pattern formation, the 
dependencies of the locations of the fronts and the longitudinal widths of different traffic phases 
inside the patterns should be found. Finally, the properties of the spatial-temporal dynamics of 
the macroscopic pattern parameters are used for the predictions of the pattern behaviour. 



(a) 

Synchronized Flow 

ql(t), vz(t ) ~(t), V2(t ) 

Models ,,ASDA" and .FOTO": 
I. Reco~iticm of traffic _nh~e: r-.,,fze¢ tmili¢"; 

S-.synchronized tzaffi¢"; J-.wide moving ~c jam" 
2. Tracine and vrediction of  the traffic ohases 

:!i!::/.ii 

iaml jaml =),tab jam2 jtm2 y=yar.h/f~ x~ (t) xdo~(t ) X.p (t) xw (t) xa=,.(t ) ~e~.w 

497 

(b) . I oy , ,~  tra~°fo.=:e,~°~ of 
local determination | traffic phase: L~ po~lble phase transitions, i.e. 
measurements of local traffic phase J .free flow" ] - J  determination of the probabi- 
(e.g. detection site) (e.g. by fuzzy logic) / ' I lib/of F-~S-phase transitions 

~. ~.~u i / Tracing Rind foreealtlng of the 

I " I determination of :=  I lJ:t A A I I ==(t) ~."(Owe ~oTo 
n ;- - - : I 'i : .  ; : : : " "L  I \ "  traffic P hne: -w ide~l  - -  of =. | I J.wtde movinl jim" object, l.e. 

I " l (~=, .~ao.  of I rnovlng traffic jam" 
' I "~(0  x." (O,~ ~OA 

Figure 8. Illustration of the approach to traffic flow pattern tracing and forecast- 
ing [60--62]. (a) I[lustration of a recognition of different traffic phases and the spatial 
boundaries (fronts) between these phases. (b) Illustration of the choice of the traffic 
model for a tracing and prediction of different traffic phases. 

Figures 8a and 8b illustrate the approach [60-62], due to local measurements of traffic the 
recognition of the traffic phases is performed first. Second the initial fronts of wide moving 
jams jam "am Xup (tO), XJ~own(t0 ) and of patterns of synchronized synch synch flow Xup (to), Xdow, (to) are determined. 
These fronts define the spatial size and location of the related "synchronized flow" object and 
"wide moving jam" object in congested regime. Finally, with the models ASDA and FeTe ,  the 
tracing and forecasting of these objects fronts in time and space is calculated, i.e., the positions 

jam "am synch of all fronts Xup (•),X3Jown(t),Xup (t), synch Xdown (t) as the functions of time are found. Note that for 
the traffic forecasting historical time series at least for the flow rates are necessary. In other 
words, after the recognition of the mentioned traffic objects in congested regime, these objects 
are traced and predicted as macroscopic single objects, i.e., the determination of the location and 
the length of the related objects at any time is the aim of the approach. The knowledge of these 
parameters of traffic objects as well as the average vehicle speed inside the objects allow us to 
calculate other traffic characteristics, e.g., travel time or vehicle trajectories. 

This philosophy has been used in [60-62] for developing a model for tracing and prediction of 
moving jams which has been called "ASDA" and of a model for tracing and prediction of the 
F --~ S-transition and of patterns of synchronized flow. The latter model has been called "FeTe"  
(forecasting of traffic objects). The test of both models ASDA and FeTe  which has been 
performed in an on-line application on the highway A5 in Germany based on available measured 
traffic data has shown that these models allow us to predict the F ---* S-transition, the propagation 
of moving traffic jams and spatial-temporal features of patterns of synchronized flow without 
parameter calibration under different infrastructures and environmental conditions [63-66]. 



498 B.S .  KERNEt% 

Movingjams 

@ 
Synchronized 
flow 

(a) Histogram A5-North on 12.04.2000 from 18:00-20:00 (printed from online oper- 
ation). 

(b) Histogram A5-South on 17.07.2000 from 07:30-09:30 using all available traffic 
data (31 sets of detectors), 

. . . . . . . . . . . .  iiiii     ii i i i 
i..: :.. : i l L :  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  __...:.. . i _  J L.. ~ i  

• : . . . . . . .  i 7.!+%,~ ~i ~ ~ 

. . . . . . . . . .  ~i ~7~ ~4#!~t::~ 

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ] . ,  . . . . . . . . . . .  ~ ~ ,,'.'" .. ~',~t:~: 

(c) the same day and the time interval as well in (b) but using reduced input data 
(nine of 31 sets of detectors). 

Figure 9. Results of the on-line application of the models ASDA and FOTO [63,64]. 



Synchronized Flow 499 

In the practical application FOTOwin for traffic of traffic objects (wide moving jams and 
patterns of synchronized flow) [63], which has been realized in a research project for the federal 
state of Hessen in Germany, both the models for the automatic tracing of jams (ASDA) and for 
the forecasting of traffic objects (FOTO) have been integrated. Examples of this application are 
shown in Figure 9. Many useful applications of the models ASDA and FOTO are possible, the 
output information of the models can be used for driver information systems or for traffic control 
systems. It is possible to predict the dissolution of moving jams and of patterns of synchronized 
flOW. 

The models have been tested on a lot of experimental data and it shows very good results. 
For the verification of the model results, empirical data of an infrastructure with many detection 
sites has been chosen. First, the data of all detectors has been used (Figure 9b). Then, the data 
of some detectors has been omitted and the process of the traffic pattern recognition has been 
repeated (Figure 9c). The data which has not been used are taken for comparison to the model 
results. Figure 9c shows the results of ASDA and FOTO with a strongly reduced configuration of 
the input values, instead of 31 detection sites for the models, only nine detection sites are used, 
i.e., only 30% of the detection site infrastructure. The histogram A5-South on July 7, 2000 from 
07:30-09:30am (Figure 9c) shows a very similar result at the same situation as in Figure 9b with 
all detectors as input, in spite of the strongly reduced input information in Figure 9c, the analysis 
of the road section and the generation of traffic objects with the models ASDA and FOTO is 
very similar. 

10. HYPOTHESES TO THEORY OF TRAFFIC FLOW 

To explain empirical features of traffic flow patterns which have been considered above, the au- 
thor has proposed alternative hypotheses (basic assumptions) for traffic flow theory [46-48,51,52]. 
These basic assumptions will be discussed below. 

10A. A Hypothesis About the Mult itude of Homogeneous States (Steady States) 
of Traffic Flow [45,46] 

In the flow-density plane, hypothetical homogeneous, and stationary, i.e., time-independent 
states (steady states) of traffic flow on a multilane-road are related to a curve (curve F) for free 
flow and to a two-dimensional region for synchronized flow (Figure 10a). The multitude of states 
of free flow on a multilane-road overlaps hypothetical homogeneous and stationary states (steady 
states) of synchronized flow in the density. They are separated by a gap in the flow rate at a 
given density. 

The multitude of hypothetical homogeneous and stationary states of synchronized flow on a 
multilane road (hatched region in Figure 10a) is identical to the related multitude of hypothet- 
ical homogeneous and stationary states of traffic flow on a one-lane road (hatched region in 
Figure 10b). 

Note that hypothetical homogeneous and stationary states of synchronized flow cannot exist 
in a vicinity of the jam density Pmax (i.e., the vehicle density inside a wide moving jam), exactly 
if the vehicle speed is lower than some minimal possible vehicle speed (narrow) (Figure 10) which ~)min 
may be about 5-10 km/h. Therefore, the related points in the hatched regions in Figure 10 have 
been excepted. 

10B. A Hypothesis About the Behavior of Infinitesimal Perturbations in Initially 
Homogeneous States of Traffic Flow [46-48] 

Independently of the vehicle density in an initial state of flow, infinitesimal perturbations of 
traffic flow variables (the vehicle speed and/or the density) do not grow in any hypothetical 
homogeneous and stationary states of either free or synchronized flow or else of homogeneous-in- 
speed states of synchronized flow. In the whole possible density range, hypothetical homogeneous 



500 B. S. KERNER 

Flow rate, q (a) Flow rate, q 
J q(m~ee ) Synchronized qma~.A 

q (~Ynx)'~ .-- .~ 
q°"t 

(syn) 
qmin, out :..F." F ......... ~'""'" 0' 

Density, p Pmax 

(b) 

Density, p Pmax 

Figure 10. Hypotheses about hypothetical steady states of traffic flow: the concate- 
nation of states of free flow (curve F) with hypothetical homogeneous and stationary 
(steady) states of synchronized flow (hatched region) and with line J for the down- 
stream front of a wide moving jam (line J) for a multilane (a) and one-lane road 
(b) [46,48,51,54]. 

and stationary states of traffic flow can exist. In other words, in the whole possible density range 
(Figure 10), there are no unstable hypothetical homogeneous and stationary states of traffic flow 
with respect to infinitesimal perturbations of any traffic flow variables. 

10C. A Hypothes is  About  Cont inuous Spatial -Temporal  Transit ions Between 
Different States of Synchronized Flow [46-48] 

Local perturbations in synchronized flow can cause continuous spatial-temporal transitions 
between different states of both hypothetical homogeneous and homogeneous-in-speed states of 
synchronized flow (hatched region in Figure 10). 

10D. Explanat ion of the Hypotheses  for Hypothet ica l  Homogeneous (Steady) States 
of Traffic F low 

To explain these hypotheses, note that in synchronized flow, spacing between vehicles is rela- 
tively low (i.e., the density is relatively high) in comparison with free flow at the same flow rate 
(Figure 10). At low spacing, a driver is able to recognize a change in the spacing to the vehicle 
in front of him, even if the difference in speed is negligible. In other words, the driver is able 
to maintain a time-independent spacing (without taking fluctuations into account) to the vehicle 
in front of him in an initially homogeneous state of synchronized flow. The ability of drivers to 
maintain a time-independent spacing should be valid for a finite range of spacing. Therefore, a 
given vehicle speed may be related to an infinite multitude of homogeneous states with different 
densities in a limited range (for example, the range ^ (syn) < < ,(syn) is related to homogeneous- Pmin _ P_  pmax 
in-speed states of synchronized flow for a fixed vehicle speed, dotted line in Figure lla). For 
this reason, the multitude of homogeneous states of synchronized flow covers a two-dimensional 
region in the flow-density plane (hatched region in Figures 10, l la, and llc). States of free flow 
(curve F in Figure l lc) and states of synchronized flow (hatched region) overlap in densities, 

_(free) i.e., pmax > Ps, where Ps is the limit (minimum) density for hypothetical homogeneous and 
stationary states of synchronized flow (the density Ps in Figure l lc  is related to the flow rate 
q(Syn) which is shown in Figure 10a). However, in free flow on a multilane road due to the min,out 
possibility for vehicles to overtake the average vehicle, speed can be higher than the maximum 
speed in synchronized flow at the same density. Therefore, there is a gap in the flow rate between 
states of free flow and synchronized flow at a given density (Figure 10a). 

Small enough perturbations in spacing which are linked to an original fluctuation in the braking 
of a vehicle do not grow. Indeed, small enough changes in spacing are allowed, therefore, drivers 
should not immediately react on it. For this reason, even after a time delay, which is due to a 
finite reaction time of drivers rreac, the drivers upstream should not brake stronger than drivers 
in front of them to avoid an accident. As a result, a local perturbation of traffic variables (density 



Synchronized Flow 501 

Flow rate, q 

q(free) I max 

~(syn) i -1max 
qout 

[ 

[ 
o 7, '  

Pmin J  i, 

The critical 
amplitude of 

density 
perturbation 

APe 

(a) 
Synchronized 

o(S.yn) :: ': 
,-m,n i + 

.(free) + : 
emax ', ' 

> 

Pmax 
Density, p 

g5 

Flow rate, q 

q(free) 
max /, 

q(Syn) 
max 

Ps 

The 
probability of 
overtaking, P 

l_ 

(c) 
Synchronized f~Z:-7_,: 

J , 

r max 

p(free) Density, p 
max 

0 f /  ,..(free) ,.,(syn).(syn) PS .(free) Pmax / 
I-'max I% r'max ~'max 

Pth 
Density, p Density, p 

P min 

! (d) 

1/.0,i ps 

Figure 11. Explanation of hypotheses to the three-phase-traffic-theory [48,52]. States 
of free (curve F) and synchronized flow (hatched region) in (a),(c) are the same as 
in Figure 10a. 

or vehicle speed) of small enough amplitude does not grow. An occurrence of this perturbation 
may cause a spatial-temporal transition to another state of synchronized flow. In other words, 
local perturbations may cause continuous spatial-temporal transitions between different states of 
synchronized flow. 

Independently of the vehicle density on a one-lane road vehicles cannot overtake. Therefore, 
hypothetical homogeneous and stationary (steady) states of traffic flow on the one-lane road at 
higher density are identical to hypothetical homogeneous and stationary states of synchronized 
flow on a multilane road (hatched regions in Figure 10). Lower density states of flow on the 
one-lane road can be approximately represented by a curve (curve O in Figure 10b) which at 
low enough density has a slope equal to the same desired speed of vehicles as in free flow on 
a multilane road (Figure 10a). In real traffic flow a spatial alternation of states of free and 
synchronized flow on a multilane-road in a middle density range can lead to the occurrence of 
'mixture states' [46]. 

10E. A Hypothes is  About  Two Different K inds of  Nuc leat ion  Effects 
in Traffic Flow [47-49] 

There are two qualitatively different kinds of nucleation effects with two related kinds of 
metastability effects in traffic flow. 

1. The nucleation effect which is responsible for the jam's formation, i.e., for the F --~ J- 
transition and the S --~ Y-transition (Figures 11a and 11b). 

2. The nucleation effect which is responsible for the F --* S-transition (Figures 11c and 11d). 



502 B.S. KERNER 

The nucleation effect which is responsible for the F ~ S-transition is linked to an avalanche 
self-decrease in the mean probability of overtaking in traffic flow, P. This self-decrease in the 
mean value of the probability of overtaking will be realized, if such a critical local perturbation of 
traffic variables (vehicle speed or/and density) occurs which causes an initial local decrease in the 
mean probability of overtaking below some critical value Pcr (dotted curve Pcr in Figure 11d). A 
dependence of the critical amplitude of the density perturbation on the density for the F ~ S- 
transition is shown by the curve Fs in Figure llb. In contrast, the nucleation effect which is 
responsible for the jam's formation is linked to an avalanche self-growth of the amplitude of a local 
critical perturbation of the traffic variables (density or/and vehicle speed), i.e., when the initial 
amplitude of the local perturbation exceeds some critical amplitude. Note that dependencies 
of the critical amplitude of the density perturbation on the density are shown by the curve Fj 
for the F ~ J-transition and by the curve  Sj for the phase transition the S ~ J-transition in 
Figure llb. The curve Sj is related to a fixed vehicle speed, dotted line in Figure l la. 

10F. A Hypothesis  About  the Critical Ampl i tude of Local Perturbat ions and the 
Probabi l i ty of Phase Transitions in Free Flow [47-49] 

At each given density in free flow, the critical amplitude of a local perturbation of traffic 
variables (density or/and vehicle speed) which is needed for the realization of the F ~ S- 
transition (curve Fs in Figure llb) is considerably lower than the critical amplitude of a local 
perturbation which is needed for the realization of the F ~ J-transition (curve Fj in Figure 1 la). 
Therefore, at each given density in free flow, the probability of an occurrence of the F --* S- 
transition is considerably higher than of the F -~ J-transition. The threshold density Pth for 
the F --* S-transition can differ both from the threshold density Pb (where Pb -~  Pmin) for the 
F --* J-transition and from the limit density Ps for homogeneous states of synchronized flow. 

Because the critical value of the mean probability of overtaking is an increasing function of 
the density (Figure l ld, dotted curve Pcr), the higher the density in free flow is the lower the 
amplitude of a local perturbation of the traffic variables (density (curve Fs in Figure llb) or/and 
vehicle speed) which causes an avalanche self-decrease in the mean probability of overtaking in 

(free) the related local region. At the limit density for free flow p = pma× , the critical amplitude of 
a local perturbation of traffic variables (density or/and vehicle speed) which is needed for the 
realization of the F ~ S-transition reaches zero, respectively, the probability of the F ~ S- 
transition reaches one. 

10G. A Hypothesis About the Nucleation Effect Which is Responsible for the 
Jam Emergence [51] 

Line J (line J in Figure l la) determines the threshold of the jam's existence and excitation. 
In other words, all (an infinite number !) homogeneous states of traffic flow which are related 
to line J in the flow-density plane are threshold states with respect to the jam's formation. 
Line J separates all homogeneous states of both free and synchronized flow into two qualitatively 
different classes. 

1. In states which are related to points in the flow-density plane lying below (see axes in 
Figure l la) line J, no jams either can continue to exist or can be excited. 

2. States which are related to points in the flow-density plane lying on and above line J are 
metastable states with respect to the jam's formation where the related nucleation effect 
can be realized. Only the local perturbations of traffic variables whose amplitude exceeds 
some critical amplitude grow and can lead to the jam's formation (up arrows, curves Fj 
and Sj in Figure llb), otherwise jams do not occur (down arrows, curves Fj and Sj in 
Figure llb). The former critical local perturbations act as nucleation centers (nuclei) for 
the jam's formation. 



Synchronized Flow 503 

The critical amplitude of the local perturbations is maximal at line J and depends both on the 
density and on the flow rate above line J. The critical amplitude of the local perturbations is 
considerably lower in synchronized flow than in free flow (compare the curve F j  with the curve Sj 
in Figure 1 lb). The lower the vehicle speed in synchronized flow is the lower the critical amplitude 
of perturbations for states of synchronized flow which are related to the same difference between 
the densities in these states and the corresponding threshold densities on the line J. 

All conclusions about spatial-temporal transitions between different states of synchronized flow 
(Section 10C), about the metastable and the stable states, and the critical amplitude of the local 
perturbations in synchronized flow on a multilane road are obviously valid also for the related 
states of flow on a one-lane road (i.e., for the states in the hatched region in Figure 10b). Thus, 
the pinch effect where narrow moving jams emerge can also occur on a one-lane road. 

10H. Exp lanat ion  of  Hypotheses  for Nuc leat ion  Effects in Traff ic F low [47-49,51] 

To explain the hypotheses, note that in free flow of low enough densities, a driver is not hindered 
to overtake, i.e., the related mean probability of overtaking is P = 1 (Figure l ld).  The higher the 
density in free flow is the lower the mean probability of overtaking. However, in free flow up to 

_(free) the limit point p = pmax , the mean probability of overtaking does not decrease drastically (solid 
curve PF, Figure l ld).  Indeed, in free flow the difference between vehicle speeds on different 
lanes of a highway can be high enough. Therefore, the mean probability ior a vehicle to be 
able to overtake is also high. In contrast to that in synchronized flow of high enough density, 
drivers are not able to overtake at all, i.e., P = 0. The lower the density of synchronized flow 
is the higher the mean probability of overtaking. However, in synchronized flow up to the limit 
point p = Ps, the mean probability of overtaking cannot increase drastically (solid curve Ps, 
Figure l ld). Indeed, in contrast to free flow, in synchronized flow the difference between vehicles 
speeds on different lines of a highway is low. This hinders the overtaking. Therefore, at each 

r (free)l 
given vehicle density in the density range {Ps, pm~x J, where states of free flow and synchronized 
flow overlap in the density, the mean probability of overtaking in free flow is considerably higher 
than in synchronized flow. As a result, the dependence P(p) is Z-shaped, i.e., it has a hysteresis 
loop, and therefore, it consists of three branches. 

(i) The branch PF for free flow. 
(ii) The branch Ps for synchronized flow. 
(iii) The branch Pcr which is related to the critical value of the mean mean probability of 

overtaking (Figure l ld).  

The sense of the branch Per is the following. If in a local region of free flow due to a local 
perturbation of traffic variables (speed or/and density) the mean probability of overtaking is 
decreased below the critical value Per, then an avalanche self-decrease in the mean probability of 
overtaking occurs leading to a self-formation of synchronized flow where P = Ps (down arrow in 
Figure l ld).  If on the contrary in a local region of synchronized flow due to a local perturbation of 
traffic variables the mean probability of overtaking is increased above the critical value Per, then 
an avalanche self-increase in the mean probability of overtaking occurs leading to a self-formation 
of free flow where P = PF (up arrow in Figure l ld).  

Because the critical value Per of the mean probability of overtaking merges with the value Pk~ 
(free) of the mean probability of overtaking for free flow at the limit density p -- pm~× for free flow, 

already a local perturbation of traffic variables of a very small (but finite) amplitude causes an 
(free) avalanche self-decrease in the mean probability of overtaking at the limit density p = pma× . 

Therefore, in free flow at the limit density p = p(mf~,e~ ¢), the probability of the F --~ S-transition 
reaches one. 

Above a threshold of any local first-order phase transition, the higher the distance from the 
threshold is the higher the related mean probability of the occurrence of the phase transition. In 
other words, above the related threshold density p -- Pth (Figure l lb)  the probability of the F 



504 B .S .  KERNER 

S-transition should be an increasing function of the density in free flow reaching one at the limit 
(free) density p = pmax for free flow. Such behavior of the probability of the breakdown phenomenon 

in a freeway bottleneck has recently been found by Persaud et al. [69]. This experiment is an 
additional confirmation of the finding by Kerner and Rehborn in [50] that the latter phenomenon 
is caused by the first-order local F --* S-transition. 

_(free) Therefore, the existence of the limit point p - -  pmax for free flow is indeed linked to the 
occurrence of the F ~ S-transition. On the contrary, the critical amplitude of traffic variables 
(density or/and vehicle speed) which is needed for the F -~ J-transition (curve Fj  in Figure 11b) 

_(free) is a relatively high finite value even at the limit density p = pmax • Indeed, as it has been 
mentioned, at any density the probability of the F --* J-transition is considerably lower than of 
the F -* S-transition. To explain this [49], let us recall that synchronized flow occurs, if due to 
a local perturbation of traffic variables (density or/and vehicle speed) the mean probability of 
overtaking decreases below the critical value Pcr (Figure 11d). The critical amplitude of a local 
perturbation which is able to cause the local avalanche self-decrease in the mean probability of 
overtaking can be considerably lower than the critical amplitude of a local perturbation which 
is needed for the F ~ J-transition. Indeed, for the occurrence of synchronized flow an initial 
perturbation itself does not necessarily have to increase avalanche-like. It must only cause an 
avalanche-like decrease in the mean value of the probability of overtaking. In contrast, for the 
jam formation the amplitude of the critical perturbation itself must begin to grow avalanche-like 
in an initial free flow. 

An explanation of the hypothesis about the nucleation effect which is responsible for the jam's 
formation has been made in [51]. Other hypotheses about features of congested flow can be found 
in [46,47]. 

10I. Hypothes is  About  Three Kinds of Maximal  Highway Capacity [51] 

There are three kinds of "maximal" capacity on a multilane highway which depend on which 
phase (free flow, synchronized flow, or wide moving jam) the traffic is in. The related maximal 

(free) ,~(syn) and capacity for the phase "free flow" is qmax , for the phase "synchronized flow" it is ,/max , 
downstream of the phase "wide moving jam" it is qout (Figure 10a). 

10J. Hypotheses  About  Spatial-Temporal Features of Traffic F low Patterns at 
Isolated Bott lenecks [52,62] 

(i) If two Conditions (a) and (b) are fulfilled: 
(a) the traffic demand upstream of the last wide moving jam in the sequence of wide 

moving jams in the general pattern does not become lower than qout, and 
(b) the synchronized flow is self-maintained at the effective location of the bottleneck, 

i.e,, the downstream front of the synchronized flow remains to be fixed in space over 
time, then the general pattern (Figure 6a) eternally exists after the pattern has been 
formed. Therefore, there is only one type of spatial-temporal traffic flow pattern in 
this case. The latter also means that the longer the time after the general pattern 
has been formed, the higher the number of the wide moving jams in the sequence of 
wide moving jams is. Consequently, the width of the region of wide moving jams, 
RWMJ (Figure 6a) continuously increases over time. 

_(pinch) (i.e., the flow rate which is averaged (ii) The mean flow rate inside the pinch region, Umean 
during a time interval which is considerable longer than the maximum duration of narrow 
moving jams) satisfies the condition: 

q(pinch)  
mean < qout. (3) 

The flow rate out from a wide moving jam qout is related to the case when a free flow is 
formed in the outflow from the jam. Correspondingly to (3), a wide moving jam at the 



Synchronized Flow 505 

upstream boundary of the synchronized flow (Figure 6a) can be considered as a region 
where 'superfluous' vehicles which cannot immediately pass through the pinch region 
should be virtually stored. In particular, if the flow rate upstream of the region of the 
wide moving jams is increasing, then the width of the most upstream wide moving jam is 
correspondingly increasing. 

(iii) Let the general pattern (Figure 6a) occur at an isolated bottleneck which is linked neither 
to on- and off-ramps (nor to a merger of two or more different roads), nor there are on- and 

_(bottle) off-ramps in the vicinity of the bottleneck. Then, the mean discharge flow rate (/out, mean 
(the flow rate through the fixed downstream front of synchronized flow which is averaged 

(pinch) ,, _.(bottle) (pinch) 
in the same manner as qmCan ) which in this case qout, mean ~ qmean , corresponding 

~(bottle) to (3) satisfies the condition t/out ' mean < qout. 
(iv) The average time from the emergence of a narrow wide moving jam in the pinch region 

till the transformation of the narrow moving jam into a wide moving jam T, ar~ow can be 
estimated from the formula 

Lpinch = IVnarrow, meanlTnarrow, (4) 

where Vnarrow, mean is the mean velocity of a narrow jam and Lpinc h is the mean length of 
the pinch region. In the representative data in Figure 5b, Lpinch ~ 3 km, v,,,~,.,-o~, m~,~,, 
-16k in /h ,  and T~a~row ~ 11rain. To explain narrow moving jams which emerge in the 
pinch region of synchronized flow [51], the following may be supposed. If a vehicle is in 
a stop inside a narrow moving jam then the related value of 7~top will be either less or of 
the same order of magnitude as Tdel. As a result, time gaps between vehicles remain of 
the same order of magnitude both inside and outside of the narrow moving jam. Thus, it 
may be supposed that in contrast to a wide moving jam, the narrow moving jam does not 
separate the traffic flows upstream and downstream of the narrow moving jam. 

The pinch effect can also occur on a one-lane road. Thus, all conclusions made above about 
the spatial-temporal structure of the general and synchronized flow patterns shown in Figure 6 
and also for expanded patterns shown in Figure 7d for a multilane-road are also valid for patterns 
which can occur upstream of a bottleneck on a one-lane road. The only one difference is that on 
the one-lane road, no free flow (vehicles cannot overtake on the one-lane road) exist. Therefore, 
it can be assumed that downstream of an insolated bottleneck on the one-lane road instead of 
fi'ee flow (Figure 6) a traffic flow which is related to the curve O in Figure 10b is realized. The 
same conclusion may be made for the region on the one-lane road upstream of the general and 
synchronized flow patterns or upstream of an expanded pattern. Instead of free flow (see Figures 6 
and 7d), a traffic flow which is related to the curve O in Figure 10b should be realized on the 
one-lane road. 

10K. Hypotheses  About  D ischarge Flow Rate  at On-Ramps [52] 

1. Depending on the highway infrastructure in the vicinity of the on-ramp and on the traffic 
_(bottle) demand the discharge flow rate qout , i.e., the flow rate through the fixed downstream 

front of synchronized flow in a spatial-temporal pattern at the on-ramp can be changed 
[~(syn) q(syn) ] (Figure 10a) within the range tumax , min,outJ 

q(Syn) < _(bottle) ~(syn) 
min,out -- (/out < __ t/max . (5) 

_(bottle) 2. The discharge flow rate (/out can be considerably higher than the flow rate out from a 
wide moving jam, qout 

q(bottle) 
out > qout, (6) 

where qout is related to the case when a free flow is formed downstream of the wide moving 
jam. 



506 B.S. KERNER 

To explain these hypotheses, note that corresponding to (3) and the empirical results [52], the 
following conditions are valid: 

q(Syn) > qout > ,(pinch) (7) 
max t /mean , 

q(sy.) (s) qout ~ min,out" 
_(pinch) (pinch) [52]. On one Besides, the flow rate (/mean cannot be lower than some minimum value qmean,min 

_(bottle) hand, the discharge flow rate %ut satisfies conditions (5). On the other hand, the obvious 
(bottle) 

condition for the mean value of the discharge flow rate, qout, mean, is valid 

q(bOtt le)  ---- ~(pinch) out, mean ~mean -{- qon-ramp, mean, (9) 
where qon-ramp, mean is the mean flow rate through the on-ramp which should be averaged in the 

_(pinch) _(bottle) 
same manner as the flow rates qmean and %ut, mean" Because conditions (7) and (8) are fulfilled, 
and the discharge flow rate can change at nearly the same vehicle speed in the large range (5) 

_(bottle) 
(Figure 10a), if qon-ramp changes then the discharge flow rate qout can also change in the same 
manner. 

However, it must be noted that empirical observations show [70] that if the pinch effect occurs 
upstream of the bottleneck on the main road then another pinch effect often occurs on the 
on-ramp upstream of the effective location of the bottleneck. This effect can lead to a two- 
dimensional development of the traffic flow pattern through the intersection between different 
roads of the traffic network. Therefore, an independent consideration of the discharge flow rate 
q(bottle) out and the flow rate qon-ramp, mean is usually not possible. A nonlinear dynamics between 
spatial-temporal effects inside two different pinch regions (on the main road and on the on-ramp) 
should be taken into account. Often such very complex nonlinear dynamics occurs if the discharge 

• (bottle) O qmax • flOW race qout is approaching the maximum capacity of the highway in synchronized fl w (syn) 

11. CONCLUSIONS 

The physics of traffic flow is proving to be much richer than most researchers working in the 
field had expected. Recent experimental observations of real traffic patterns have discovered 
new phases of traffic flow, such as synchronized flow, and revealed a large number of features 
that are qualitatively similar to those observed in other nonlinear systems. The next challenge 
for mathematicians and physicists in this field is to develop new mathematical and theoretical 
concepts to explain these features. 

REFERENCES 
1. M.J. Lighthill and G.B. Whitham, Proc. R. Soc. A 229, 317, (1955). 
2. D.C. Gazis, R. Herman and R.W. Rothery, Operations Res. 9, 545-567, (1961). 
3. G.F. Newell, Operations Res. 9, 209, (1961). 
4. I. Prigogine and R. Herman, Kinetic Theory of Vehicular Traffic, American Elsevier, New York, (1971). 
5. H.J. Payne, In Mathematical Models of Public Systems, Volume 1, (Edited by G.A. Bekey), Simulation 

Council, La Jolla, (1971). 
6. R. Wiedemann, Simulation des Verkehrsflusses, University of Karlsruhe, Kaxlsruhe, (1974). 
7. P.G. Gipps, Trans. Res. B. 15, 105-111, (1981). 
8. G.F. Newell, Applications of Queueing Theory, Chapman Hall, London, (1982). 
9. C.F. Daganzo, Fundamentals of Transportation and Traffic Operations, Elsevier Science, New York, (1997). 

10. J.-B. Lesort, Editor, Transportation and traffic theory, In Proceedings of the 13 th International Symposium 
on Transportation and Traffic Theory, Elsevier Science, Oxford, (1996). 

11. A. Ceder, Editor, Transportation and traffic theory, In Proceedings of the 1~ th International Symposium on 
Transportation and Traffic Theory, Elsevier Science, Oxford, (1999). 

12. D.E. Wolf, M. Schreckenberg and A. Bachem, Editors, Traffic and granular flow, In Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Traffic and Granular Flow, World Scientific, Singapore, (October 1995). 

13. M. Schreckenberg and D.E. Wolf, Editors, Traffic and granular flow '97, In Proceedings of the International 
Workshop on Traffic and Granular Flow, October 1997, Springer, Singapore, (1998). 



Synchronized Flow 507 

14. D. Helbing, H.J. Herrmann, M. Schreckenberg and D.E. Wolf, Editors, Traffic and granular flow '99, In Pro- 
ceedings of the International Workshop on Traffic and Granular Flow, October 1999, Springer, Heidelberg, 
(2000). 

15. K. Nagel and M. Schreckenberg, J. Phys. (France) 1 2, 2221, (1992). 
16. G.B. Whitham, Proc. R. Soc. London A 428, 49, (1990). 
17. M. Bando, K. Hasebe, A. Nakayama, A. Shibata and Y. Sugiyama, Phys. Rev. E 51, 1035-1042~ (1995). 
18. B.S. Kerner and P. Konh~iuser, Phys. Rev. E 50, 54-83, (1994). 
19. M. Herrmann and B.S. Kerner, Physica A 255, 163-188, (1998). 
20. M. Bando, K. Hasebe, A. Nakayama, A. Shibata and Y. Sugiyama, J. Phys. I France 5, 1389, (1995). 
21. S. KrauB, P. Wagner and C. Gawron, Phys. Rev. E 53, 5597, (1997). 
22. R. Barlovic, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider and M. Schreckenberg, Eur. Phys. J. B. 5, 793, (1998). 
23. D. Helbing and M. Schreckenberg, Phys. Rev. E 59, R2505, (1999). 
24. M. Treiber, A. Hennecke and D. Helbing, Phys. Rev. E 59, 239, (1999). 
25. R. Mahnke and J. Kaupu~s, Phys. Rev. E 59, 117, (1999). 
26. G.B. Whitham, Linear and Nonlinear Waves, Wiley, New York, (1974). 
27. A.D. May, Traffic Flow Fundamental, Prentice Hall, N J, (1990). 
28. M. Cremer, Der Verkehrsfluss auf Schnellstrassen, Springer, Berlin, (1979). 
29. W. Leutzbach, Introduction to the Theory of Traffic Flow, Springer, Berlin, (1988). 
30. D. Helbing, Verkehrsdynamik, Springer, Berlin, (1997). 
31. R. Kfihne, In Highway Capacity and Level of Service, (Edited by U. Brannolte), p. 211, A.A. Balkema, 

Rotterdam, (1991). 
32. K. Nagel, D.E. Wolf, P. Wagner and P. Simon, Phys. Rev. E 58, 1425-1437, (1999). 
33. B.S. Kerner, S.L. Klenov and P. Konh~iuser, Phys. Rev. E 56, 4200-4216, (1997). 
34. B.S. Kerner, P. Konh~iuser and M. Schilke, Phys. Rev. E 51, 6243-6246, (1995). 
35. H.Y. Lee, H.-W. Lee and D. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 1130, (1998). 
36. D. Helbing and M. Treiber, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3042-3045, (1998). 
37. D. Helbing, A. Hennecke and M. Treiber, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 4360, (1999). 
38. H.Y. Lee, H.-W. Lee and D. Kim, Phys. Rev. E 59, 5101, (1999). 
39. M. Treiber, A. Hennecke and D. Helbing, Phys. Rev. E 62, 1805, (2000). 
40. D. Chowdhury, L. Santen and A. Schadschneider, Physics Reports 329, 199, (2000). 
41. D. Helbing, Rev. Mod. Phys. (to appear). 
42. J. Treiterer, Investigation of traffic dynamics by aerial photogrammetry techniques, Ohio State University 

Technical Report PB 246 094, Columbus, OH, (1975). 
43. M. Koshi, M. Iwasaki and I. Ohkura, In Proceedings of 8 th International Symposium on Transportation and 

Traffic Theory, (Edited by V.F. Hurdle et al.), p. 403, University of Toronto Press, Toronto, Ontario, (1983). 
44. F.L. Hall, B.L. Allen and M.A. Gunter, Trans. Res. A 20, 197, (1986). 
45. B.S. Kerner and H. Rehborn, Phys. Rev. E 53, R4275-R4278, (1996). 
46. B.S. Kerner, A theory of congested traffic flow, In Proceedings of the 5 ~d Symposium on Highway Capacity and 

Level of Service, Volume 2, (Edited by R. Rysgaard), pp. 621-642, Road Directorate, Ministry of Transport, 
Denmark, (1998). 

47. B.S. Kerner, Theory of congested traffic flow: Self-organization without bottlenecks, In Transportation and 
Traffic Theory, (Edited by A. Ceder), pp. 147-171, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, (1999). 

48. B.S. Kerner, Congested traffic flow: Observations and theory, Transportation Research Record 1678, 160- 
167, (1999). 

49. B.S. Kerner, The physics of traffic, Physics World 12 (8), 25-30, (August 1999). 
50. B.S. Kerner and H. Rehborn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4030, (1997). 
51. B.S. Kerner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3797, (1998). 
52. B.S. Kerner, Transportation Research Record 1710, 136, (2000). 
53. B.S. Kerner, Phase transitions in traffic flow, [14], 253-284. 
54. B.S. Kerner, J. of Physics A: Math. Gen. 33, L221, (2000). 
55. R. Herman, E.W. Montroll, R.B. Potts and R.W. Rothery, Operations Res. 7, 86-106, (1959). 
56. B.S. Kerner and V.V. Osipov, Autosolitons: A New Approach to Problems of Self-Organization and Turbu- 

lence, Kluwer, Dordrecht, (1994). 
57. B.S. Kerner and H. Rehborn, Phys. Rev. E 53, R1297-R1300, (1996). 
58. B.S. Kerner and H. Rehborn, Internationales verkehrswesen 50 (5), 196-203, (1998). 
59. B.S. Kerner, Traffic and granular flow '97, In Proceedings o/ the International Workshop on Traffic and 

Granular Flow, October 1997, pp. 239-267, Springer, Singapore, (1998). 
60. B.S. Kerner, H. Rehborn and H. Kirschfink, German patent DE 196 47 127 (www.depanet. de) (U.S.-patent 

U.S. 5861820 (dips-2.dips.org)), (1998); B.S. Kerner and H. Rehborn, German patent publication DE 198 35 
979. 

61. B.S. Kerner, M. Aleksic and U. Denneler, German Patent Publication DE 199 44 077. 
62. B.S. Kerner, German Patent Publication DE 199 44 075. 
63. B.S. Kerner, M. Aleksic, H. Rehborn and A. Haug, In Proceedings of 7 ~h ITS World Congress on Intelligent 

Transport Systems, Turin, 6-9. Nov., Paper No.: 2035, (2000); Traffic Engineering ~ Control 42, 282-287, 
(2001). 



508 B.S. KERNER 

64. B.S. Kerner, H. Rehborn, M. Aleksic, A. Haug and R. Lange, Straflenverkehrstechnik 10//~000, S, 521-527; 
Traffic Engineering ~ Control 42, 345-350, (2001). 

65. B.S. Kerner, H. Rehborn and M. Aleksic, Traffic and granular flow '99, In Proceedings of the International 
Workshop on Traffic and Granular Flow, October 1999, pp. 339-344, Springer, Heidelberg, (2000). 

66. B.S. Kerner, M. Aleksic and H. Rehborn, In Proceedings of 9 th IFAC Symposium Control in Transportation 
Systems ~000, Volume ~, June 13-15, 2000, (Edited by E. Schnieder and U. Becker), pp. 501-506, IFAC. 

67. H. Haken, Synergetics, Springer, Berlin, (1997). 
68. B.S. Kerner, Transportation Systems, (Edited by M. Papageorgiou and A. Pouliezos), pp. 765-770, Elsevier 

Science, London, (1997). 
69. B. Persaud, S. Yagar and R. Brownlee, Transportation Research Record 1634, 64, (1998). 
70. B.S. Kerner, (unpublished). 


