
Journal of Economic Geography 7 (2007) pp. 619–634 doi:10.1093/jeg/lbm023
Advance Access Published on 29 May 2007

Economic geography and the evolution of networks
Johannes Glu¨ckler*

Abstract
An evolutionary perspective on economic geography requires a dynamic understanding
of change in networks. This article explores theories of network evolution for their
use in geography and develops the conceptual framework of geographical network
trajectories. It specifically assesses how tie selection constitutes the evolutionary
process of retention and variation in network structure and how geography affects
these mechanisms. Finally, a typology of regional network formations is used to discuss
opportunities for innovation in and across regions.

Keywords: evolution, network trajectory, evolutionary economic geography, social network
analysis, innovation
Date submitted: 2 September 2006 Date accepted: 3 February 2007

1. Introduction

The limited explanatory value of neoclassical growth theory to understand unequal
rates of regional growth and the geographical agglomeration of innovation has
inspired an evolutionary approach to economic geography (Boschma and Lambooy,
1999; Boschma and Frenken, 2006). An evolutionary take on economic geography is
committed to the integration of growth and innovation theories and to endogenous
explanations of regional economic development (Frenken and Boschma, 2007).
The project is ambitious and far from being coherently established (Martin and
Sunley, 2006; Essletzbichler and Rigby, 2007). While endogenous growth theory has
advanced our understanding of sustained growth through the simultaneous production
of new technologies and accumulation of knowledge (Romer, 1990)—geographers
are interested in understanding how innovation is actually performed and why innova-
tive practice often concentrates in geographical proximity. Interestingly, research
on evolution in economics has attracted much attention to geography. A lot of the
economic evidence on path dependence and lock-in has actually been exemplified in
the context of geographic clusters and agglomeration economies (see Martin and
Sunley, 2006 for illustrations of the argument).
One way of analyzing regional economic development is to look at the economy as

interactions in networks. Economists have become increasingly receptive to social
network concepts, since there is now plentiful evidence of the manifold ways in which
social networks affect economic outcomes (Granovetter, 2005). Similar to evolutionary
economics, social network theory often draws on regional clusters to study the
conditions, outcomes and dynamics of network structure. More generally it seems,

*Catholic University of Eichsta¨tt-Ingolstadt, Ostenstrasse 18, 85072 Eichsta¨tt, Germany.
email5johannes.glueckler@ku-eichstaett.de4

� The Author (2007). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




organization theory has discovered geography as a major contingency for organiza-

tional change (Owen-Smith and Powell, 2004; Freeman and Audia, 2006). In economic

geography, networks have celebrated an exceptional career over many years and they
have coined terminology in theories of geographical clusters, global cities, international

production systems and globalization. Following a recent critical review, however,

much of the use of networks in economic geography has been rather selective, often

metaphorical and little formalized (Grabher, 2006).
This article is exploratory of the long neglected development of formal network

theory and analysis in economic geography. It explores the only recently emerging

research on network evolution (McPherson et al., 2001; Baum et al., 2003; Kilduff and
Tsai, 2003) and aims at integrating concepts from network evolution with economic

geography. This analysis has three objectives: first, to develop the concept of

a geographical network trajectory which defines the evolutionary approach to network

dynamics and which permits the study of network evolution in and across regions;

second, to examine mechanisms of retention and variation in network structure which

are endogenous to network evolution; and third, to assess models of variation in

network trajectories with respect to regional innovation. The article argues that regional
growth and innovation largely result from the bridging and brokering of unconnected

networks or network clusters. After defining the basic concepts in section two, section

three will discuss in detail the potential mechanisms which constitute the evolutionary

principles of selection, retention and variation mechanisms (and in this sequence).

It closes with a discussion of potential sources of innovation for regional growth.

2. Defining the elements of a geographical network trajectory

2.1. Evolution

There are at least two forms of change which are not evolutionary (Nelson, 1995):
First, when change is random, future events are independent from previous events such

that there are no inferences from a given course of development on the future. Second,

when change is determined, the outcome of a certain development is also independent

from the sequence of events. More radically, even, equilibrium theory determines a

stable equilibrium which as a final outcome is both independent from the start condi-

tions as well as from the sequence of events (Martin and Sunley, 2006). In contrast,

change is evolutionary when future events are not independent from past events and
when the sequence of events makes a difference for the outcome. Evolutionary change is

a function of path-dependence and contingency. Path-dependence is a concept of

cumulative causation in which a certain sequence of events creates unequal propensities

for future events. Though path-dependent change allows for inferences from a present

on future states of development, it is subject to contingency. Economic processes are at

the same time contingent in that the agents’ strategies and actions may deviate from

existing development paths. Economic action in open systems is not ex-ante determined

and cannot be predicted through universal spatial laws (Sayer, 2000). If evolution is
neither random nor determined, the academic interest should focus on both, the

mechanisms that create cumulative causation and lead to path-dependence and those

mechanisms that produce contingency and lead to the emergence of new variety and

potentially path destruction.

620 . Glu¨ckler

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




2.2. Network

Looking back at 20 years of research on networks in the social sciences there are all
kinds of different conceptions and uses of the term. One irritating use of network occurs
in the governance literature, for instance, where a strategic alliance between two firms
is often referred to as a network. In the language of network theory a strategic alliance
is a dyad or relation of a specific type, not yet a network. Moreover, institutional
economists would object to call a market or a firm a network. However, network theory
conceives all systems of interactions as networks, and would thus be able to study
markets as networks (White, 1981; Baker, 1990) or firms as networks. This article
subscribes to the basic understanding of a network put forward in one of the most
widely cited definitions: a social network is ‘a specific set of linkages among a defined
set of persons, with the additional property that the characteristics of these linkages
as a whole may be used to interpret the social behavior of the persons involved’
(Mitchell, 1969, 2).
This definition has two important implications. First, it implies that relations rather

than actors are in the focus of analysis and that the specific structure of relations may
be used to draw inferences and expectations on individual and collective action
(Mizruchi, 1994; Gulati, 1998). Structure is not conceived as something virtual, but as
concrete social interaction. This view helps to bridge the dualism between structure
and agency since structure is treated in such a way that it can be studied empirically
and in direct association with economic interaction. Second, empirical networks
are always socially constructed analytical reductions based on conceptual criteria
(Marsden, 1990) such as pointed out in Mitchell’s definition: the kind of relationship
and the set of relevant actors. For the purpose of this article, the discussion focuses on
networks as formal or informal relationships between individuals (e.g. entrepreneurs,
employees) or organizations (e.g. firms, projects). Third, since a network so defined
implies the same kind of relationship for each tie, analytical emphasis is put on the
structural effects of network position on behavior and opportunity.

2.3. Geography

The relation between geography and networks can be theorized in (at least) two ways:
First, proximity affects network formation. The most widely used approach in economic
geography aims at assessing the latent effects of physical proximity/distance on
economic processes. Sometimes these effects are abbreviated in unfortunate terms
of ‘spatial causation’. Space, however, is not a necessary cause of human action.
Instead, there are at least two underlying social technologies implicit in any account
of the geography of economic relations: communication technology (Storper and
Venables, 2004) and transport technology (Marquis, 2003). Only with respect to the
actors’ communication preferences and mobility opportunities may the contingent
relation between physical space and economic interaction be established. In other
words: the constraints of proximity only rule if face-to-face is the only mode of
communication and if travel is prohibitive. In any other case, proximity is contingent
on the underlying social technologies.
Second, place makes a difference. Borrowing the notion of the resource bundle from

the theory of the growth of the firm (Penrose, 1959), a place may be conceived as
a bundle of resources and opportunities with the additional characteristic of spatial
contiguity. A place-specific resource profile conveys a source of contextuality,

Economic geography and the evolution of networks . 621

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




difference and contingency for economic development (Sayer, 1991; Bathelt and
Glu¨ckler, 2005). This localized resource profile comprises the structural aspects of
relationships (e.g. social capital, structural holes) as well as the material, social
and institutional resources that these relationships access and transfer. The association
between the region and the network is by no means unidirectional. Places do not only
constrain network formation but social interaction in networks also shape its
geography (Storper and Walker, 1989). Both views of geography matter in a concept
of geographical network trajectory.

2.4. Geographical network trajectory

The essential starting point for any theory of network evolution is the question of
‘how do structural dimensions of an interorganizational communication network
at Time 1 affect the interactions among member organizations – specifically, their
formation of ties to other organizations – at Time 2?’ (Kenis and Knoke, 2002, 277–78).
The network trajectory (Kilduff and Tsai, 2003) is an appropriate concept in the
analysis of network evolution which combines the notions of evolution, network and
geography: it describes a geographically and historically specific development path of
a network in which the formation and dissolution of ties in earlier stages generates
cumulative propensities for the formation and dissolution of ties in the future and
in which the mechanisms of path-disruption and variation are endogenous.
This perspective explicitly moves beyond the dyadic analysis of single relations to the
analysis of entire networks of relations. A theory of network evolution, thus, looks
at the changes that every new tie produces in the existing structure and, conversely,
at the impact that the structure imposes on the formation of the next tie. Note that the
unit of analysis is always dyadic tie formation, whereas the object of knowledge is
network structure.
Any evolutionary system may be characterized by the principles of selection,

retention (continuity) and variation (Nelson and Winter, 2002). The next section
discusses these principles in the context of networks. After defining the selection
principle of relationships, the effects of retention and variation of tie formation are
discussed in more detail. Retention focuses on those cumulative structural mechanisms
that cause new ties to reproduce and reinforce an existing network structure.
Path-dependence is only half the story. Similar to earlier efforts (Boschma and
Lambooy, 1999), this article explores variation as a set of mechanisms that enables
novelty and path-disruption. An evolutionary theory which is interested in an
endogenous understanding of the production of variety needs to go beyond the
exogenous assumption of variety by random or chance events. Instead, this article
emphasizes the process of endogenous network variation to explain the emergence of
novelty from existing paths. Finally, this article aims at exploring the contribution
of network evolution to an evolutionary economic geography. Complying with
the discussion above, the geography of network trajectories may be inquired in two
respects: one is to examine the latent effect of geography on the network trajectory;
the other is to explore the effect of localized network evolution on regional innovation.
The following section explores in more detail the nature of the selection mechanism in
inter-firm networks, as well as the role of geography in processes of network retention
and variation.

622 . Glu¨ckler

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




3. The evolutionary process in the geographical network trajectory

3.1. Selection: competitive selection of relational advantage

Selection mechanisms are often attributed to the environment. While in biology the

natural environment selects biological fitness (natural selection), in evolutionary

economics it is market competition that selects firms (competitive selection),

correspondingly (Knudsen, 2002). Since, in the context of networks, selection refers

to the formation of linkages between members of a network (Gulati, 1995; Stuart, 1998;

Gulati and Gargiulo, 1999; Ahuja, 2000; Venkatraman and Lee, 2004), a number of

particular conditions seem to require a revised notion of the selection principle.
First, in contrast to the selection of firms, routines or technologies, which are entities,

the linkages in a network are relations between pairs of actors. This has an important

consequence, namely, that the selection of a tie is subject not only to an external

selective environment, but also to the decisions of the mutual members involved.

This implies a dual conceptualization of selection mechanisms. Selection may be

a function of exogenous change with respect to the degree of adaptation of relation-

ships but also a function of endogenous incentives and strategies to choose and change

relations by both parties involved in a relationship.
Second, new relationships may occur between incumbent firms which have a history

of linkages in the network or new firms without any previous relationship. A complete

theory of network evolution would thus have to theorize both, the emergence and

disappearance of ties and nodes. This article focuses on the dynamics of relationships

and makes selective reference to the interrelation with the dynamics of node entries

and exits.
Third, interaction is costly and as such a scarce resource. This article treats tie

selection as a problem of the efficient allocation of relationships because empirical

networks of firms are impossible to be fully connected. The law of N-squared states

that the number of possible contacts increases roughly as the square of the number of

actors in a network (Krackhardt, 1994). In other words: ‘most choices are impossible

for most people’ (McPherson et al., 1992, 168). Though the number of potential

relations depends on the actors’ resource endowment and the kind of relationship,

there is always a limit to a firm’s capacity to relate with other firms.
Fourth, from a utility perspective, a firm’s set of connections may yield differential

returns on the invested relationships. One of the key motives to engage in enduring

relationships with other firms is to access external resources (Pfeffer and Salancik,

1978). This, in turn, increases or decreases a firm’s attractiveness for future alliance

partners. Tie selection may then be conceived as the competitive allocation of scarce

relationships where the commitment dedicated to one relationship invokes opportu-

nity costs for each unrealized contact. These conditions suggest tie selection to be

a competitive process which depends on exogenous changes as well as endogenous

dynamics. To give an example: a relationship between two firms may be more

attractive because of exogenous changes (e.g. market regulation) but also because of

endogenous changes in the network (e.g. one partner has become more attractive

because of her alliance with a third party). While many evolutionary approaches stop

at the exogenous factor, this article explicitly seeks to explore endogenous mecha-

nisms of network evolution that produce retention and variation of existing network

structures.

Economic geography and the evolution of networks . 623

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




3.2. Retention: place-dependence and network trajectory

Network retention refers to the structural effect of past choices on the propensities for

future tie selection within the network. Retention mechanisms result either from the

persistence of ties, that is, slow decay, or the path-dependent formation of new ties.
Research on the decay of personal relationships between employees suggests that

relationships last longer, the more prominent employees are in the social hierarchy, the
more similar their work, and the stronger their relations are. Following Burt, decay

is a power function of time in which the probability of decay decreases with tie age
and node age (Burt, 2000, 23). A review of the organizational literature on networks

suggests, more generally, that homophily is a significant driver of tie selection
and retention (McPherson et al., 2001; Sorenson, 2003). While studies on the decay of

existing relationships ask how long a given tie will sustain, another approach is to ask
where the next tie will most likely emerge. A network might experience a massive

turnover of decaying and emerging linkages between its nodes and still display the same

degree of centralization, density and fragmentation. Whenever new ties replicate or
reinforce a given network structure this indicates the operation of path-dependence.

From the organization literature, three alternative mechanisms are particularly
interesting:
First, the preferential attachment-hypothesis expects firms with many ties at one

point in time are more likely to receive new ties in the future than those with fewer ties

(Baraba´si and Reka, 1999). There is obviously accumulative advantage for well
positioned actors on the one side and a liability of unconnectedness for peripheral

actors on the other (Powell et al., 1996). The concept is based on the observation that
the degree distribution of a network is scale-free, i.e. follows a power-law (Baraba´si

et al., 2002). Empirical research supports this hypothesis. The alliance behavior of
multinational corporations suggests that with increasing experience and connectedness,

firms will be more likely to have further alliances in the future (Gulati, 1999). However,
since firms are limited in the number of relationships they can maintain, the process of

centralization of ties is empirically finite (Holme et al., 2004). Second, the embedding-
hypothesis expects that future ties form around strong ties by processes of trust and

indirect referrals. This cumulative interconnection leads to processes of social

embedding (Gulati and Gargiulo, 1999). Persistent network structures emerge from
cognitive embeddedness and the formation of mental models within clique-like groups

of interconnected actors (Baum et al., 2003). Third, the multi-connectivity-hypothesis
expects that networks expand through a process in which firms seek diversity of

relations and form multiple independent paths among each other to enhance a multiple
reachability of partners. In an exemplary study, Powell et al. (2005) are amongst the

first to explicitly test alternative hypotheses on the emergence of new relationships in an
expanding network of inter-firm alliances in US biotechnology. Their research supports

the cumulative advantage of multi-connectivity and demonstrates that new alliances

were more likely to form between those firms that were more multiply or more diversely
linked to each other at a previous stage (Powell et al., 2005). Following this evidence,

new linkages reinforce an existing multiple cohesion and, over time, cohesive subgroups
will emerge. Another empirical analysis of the alliance network in biotechnology

corroborates the operation of retention mechanisms (Walker et al., 1997). A year-
to-year comparison of structural equivalence for each pair of actors showed that if

two firms were structurally equivalent, i.e. they were connected to the same other

624 . Glu¨ckler

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




companies, they most likely remained so throughout the subsequent expansion of the
network. This finding leads Walker et al. (1997) to argue for path dependence in
network growth. In sum, preferential attachment, embedding and multi-connectivity
are cumulative retention mechanisms that induce path-dependence in networks.
Network retention mechanisms do not operate independent of geography.
Geographical location is a non-relational condition that may strongly affect the
evolution of the network trajectory. Two classes of processes are important for place-
dependent effects on the network trajectory: local externalities of communication and
organizational inertia:

3.2.1. Local externalities of communication

Externalities of communication render additional local ties more likely than the
formation of extra-regional relations. (Stuart, 1998; Sorenson and Stuart, 2001;
Powell et al., 2002). Geographical proximity is, of course, a matter of scale: two firms
may be co-located in the same office building but also in the same country.
The empirical impact of co-location, however, is often limited to the regional
level where repeated face-to-face communication is not prohibitive. Powell et al.
(2005), for instance, found unequivocal evidence for a strong geographical bias
on strategic alliances in biotechnology. New ties as well as repeat ties were more
likely when two firms were co-located. Another study on the same sector emphasizes the
role of knowledge spillovers in local firm alliances and found that co-location and
local membership in the network compensates for the lack of centrality of a firm’s
position in the alliance network (Owen-Smith and Powell, 2004). ‘Being there’
compensates for the disadvantage of low centrality. Information spillovers which are
typical of serendipitous networks provide cumulative advantage for co-location
and cluster growth in technology and knowledge-intensive industries. The notion of
local network retention is further supported by empirical evidence for local
entrepreneurial relationships to become more persistent and beneficial after start-up
than more remote relations (Schutjens and Stam, 2003). One explanation for this effect
is the mechanism of local institutionalization. Doreian and Woodard (1999) identified
networks in which extra-local forms of institutionalizing relations were not duplicated
but local relations institutionalized into network structures dedicated to the same
pool of clients.
Geographical proximity also affects the entry of nodes in a network. In addition to

the cumulative formation of local ties in response to communication externalities,
relocation mechanisms further enhance place-dependent agglomeration. Since the
difficulty of accurate transmission and interpretation of knowledge increases with its
complexity, spatial proximity often locks-out remote actors from the knowledge flow
and thus forces them to (re-) locate in spatial proximity in order to participate in the
cluster communication (Fleming and Sorenson, 2001). Empirical research illustrates
that the more complex the knowledge in a particular industry, the more do industries
agglomerate (Sorenson, 2005). Since the propensity to get in contact with someone is
very low but increases with spatial proximity (McPherson et al., 1992), regions with
cumulative locational advantage might select talent and knowledge by migration and
relocation. These findings indicate that networks do not only evolve in terms of the
geographical mobility of existing relationships but also in terms of entries and exits of
nodes (firms). Entrepreneurship, new firm foundations and spin-offs (node entry) are

Economic geography and the evolution of networks . 625

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




also an important element of local network retention. Finally, geography is also a
significant constraint on search behavior: when people need intermediate contacts to
reach a (socially) remote target, they choose contacts in geographical proximity of this
target to transfer information (Dodds et al., 2003).

3.2.2. Organizational inertia

According to the theory of organizational inertia the change of core features in
organizations requires adaptive cascading processes of reorganization which expose
organizations at a higher risk of unfitness and mortality (Hannan et al., 2004). If this
is applied to the alliance behavior of firms, some degree of persistence in previous
network structures can be inferred (Li and Rowley, 2002). Institutions may persist
because they favor distributional claims on resources of those who exert the power to
maintain institutions. This resistance to change may be transferred through the network
when certain actors exert relational power upon others to prevent certain types of
new ties. Moreover, the interrelatedness of institutions may render the costs of changing
one out of a set of institutions prohibitive (Frankel, 1955). There is an illustrative
evidence for retention mechanisms on networks in a geographical perspective. Marquis
(2003) compared the development of the largest urban community systems of
interlocking directorships in the US. He demonstrates that the business networks in
cities established prior to the advent of air travel technology were significantly more
locally bound than networks in younger cities. Despite the availability of modern travel
technologies in all cities today, even new corporate board positions were filled with
local directors. This persistence of geographical network structure in older communities
illustrates the basic argument of imprinting theory (Stinchcombe, 1965): organizations
adopt organizational characteristics in response to the environmental conditions during
their period of foundation. This imprinted pattern sustains through the evolution even
if in later periods the environment changes. Since the social technology of large distance
travel was not available before air transport, local business communities were
constrained to assign local directors on their corporate boards. This imprinted practice
constitutes a ‘locally legitimate template of action’ (Marquis, 2003, 656) which
is continuously emulated and thus preserves network structure over time. Social
networks between individual economic actors as well as between firms convey aspects
of cumulative, path-dependent evolution over time. The sum of these retention
mechanisms may ultimately lead to situations of local lock-in (Hassink, 2005; Martin
and Sunley, 2006), in which previously selected patterns of relations are preserved to
a degree that new alternatives are prohibitive or do not enter the network. States of
lock-in are a problem which can only be overcome by a continuous momentum
of contingency and the emergence of new variation.

3.3. Variation: path-destruction and the structural sources of innovation

A comparison over a large number of different empirical inter-firm networks conveys
an intriguing observation: inter-firm networks often look the same. They display
evident patterns of small worlds which are essentially characterized by high local
clustering and short global separation (Watts, 1999) and display a high degree of
robustness (Kogut and Walker, 2001). This observation provokes the question if
there is a possibility for network trajectories to experience variation endogenously.

626 . Glu¨ckler

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




In Darwinian terms, variation is defined as a random mutation process which
fundamentally treats novelty as an exogenous circumstance. The study of the economy,
however, is dedicated to the exploration of mechanisms that generate novelty and new
development paths. Hence, variation should be conceived as the result of endogenous
mechanisms of network formation and dissolution. In the organization literature,
the major source of contingency and variation in network structure is the bridging
of unconnected network clusters. Variation in a network refers to the differential
selection of new ties which countervail against an existing trajectory. Hence, variation
is defined at the level of tie selection but refers to the change in network structure.
Tie selection affects the flow and recombination of resources in the network.

Knowledge, preferences and routines enter a cluster of interconnected actors through
the bridging of structural holes between unconnected clusters (Burt, 2004). Whether this
new variety is selected into a local cluster depends on processes of adoption and
adaptation. Empirical research in the context of the social composition of voluntary
groups found that when group members maintained ties to non-members they were
likely to leave the group whereas ties within the group and the size of the group
increased the likelihood for enduring membership in that group (McPherson et al.,
1992). In short: a link outside the group shortens membership duration in the group.
It is this contingency of establishing boundary spanning relations which renders
variation inherently likely in any open system of social and economic relations.
Empirically, there seems to be a tendency for some new relations to bridge a network
cluster which essentially countervails the retention mechanisms outlined above.
In the context of firms, empirical evidence suggests that strategic alliance behavior
shifts from socially embedded, cohesive or ‘identity-based networks’ in early stages of
firm emergence to more sparse, rationally managed or ‘calculative networks’ in later
stages (Hite and Hesterly, 2001; Baum et al., 2003; Lavie 2004). This process offers
relational variation and the possibility to channel novelty in the established small
worlds. At the same time and once a bridge is established, the cumulative retention
mechanisms of preferential attachment, embedding and multi-connectivity increase the
odds for further external links and thus counter existing patterns of path-dependence.
But who bridges the cliques: the core or the periphery of a cluster? In a longitudinal

analysis of the evolving Canadian investment bank syndicate network, peripheral
firms were found to be more likely to span clique boundaries than core firms
(Baum et al., 2003; Rowley et al., 2005). This finding may be interpreted in the language
of competitive tie selection: retention mechanisms cumulate into embedded social
structure and favor early advantage of some actors who become core players in their
small worlds. Over time, however, peripheral players aim at improving their competitive
position by spanning small worlds and by sourcing otherwise unconnected clusters
within the overall network. Notwithstanding, the evolutionary occurrence of boundary-
spanning ties is to a considerable degree also subject to chance events (Baum et al.,
2003). Networks are topological associations between actors without an inherent
geography. Strong ties may be distant or local as well as clique-spanning may be
remote or close by. In order to avoid an implicit dualism of strong-local ties and
weak-global linkages, Figure 1 illustrates some of the potential geographies of network
topologies and their specific variation opportunities. In a geographical perspective,
then, there are three different concepts of (permanent) geographical place and one
concept of temporary place with specific opportunities to convey variation during
network evolution.

Economic geography and the evolution of networks . 627

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




3.3.1. Global bridging

The default of innovation in regional clusters is the notion of a densely connected
localized inter-firm network which generates variation by establishing bridges to extra-
regional network clusters in search of new knowledge and complimentary resources.
This notion is well documented in the literature on neo-Marshallian nodes (Amin and
Thrift, 1992) which combines Marshall’s logic of a local division of labor with non-local
exchange relations forward and backward the value chain. Research on the global
interrelations of the Londoner media industry, for instance, has illustrated empirically,
that firm networks sustain innovative potential by economizing on local proximity and
selective access to knowledge external to the urban cluster (Nachum and Keeble, 2003).
The logic of local clustering and global bridging is also implicit in the literature on
global cities. Generating variation by sourcing extra-regional assets through boundary
spanning ties thus corresponds with the illustration of place 1 (Figure 1). If the regional
economy is dominated by just one interconnected cluster, variation through external
linkages becomes crucial to avoid technological lock-in and subsequent economic
decline.

3.3.2. Local bridging

Another possibility is the bridging between different but co-located network clusters
as represented by place 2 (Figure 1). Local bridging corresponds with notions of the
learning region and endogenous regional development (Hassink, 2005), where variation
is generated by recombination and interconnection between distinct clusters of
relations. The range and scope of variation largely depends on the degree of local
diversity of network clusters. This perspective fits with the notion that cities are
conducive to innovation because of local variety (Jacobs, 1969). Urban variety increases
the serendipity for spillover-effects between industries or subclusters of networks and
enhances regional growth (Glaeser et al., 1992). However, novelty may not only result
from the bridging of unconnected parts within but also between different networks.

Figure 1. Alternative geographies of small world topologies.

628 . Glu¨ckler

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




In early organizational ecology and contingency approaches, network change is seen as
an adaptive process responding to exogenous environmental change (Lomi et al., 2005;
Koka et al., 2006). In contrast, community ecology approaches (Freeman and Audia,
2006) surmount the network-environment dualism by conceiving a more systemic
framework of an ecology of networks (Carley, 1999). A view of the network ecology
permits to analyze the recursive feedback loops between a set of interrelated networks
as a co-evolutionary process, i.e. evolutionary changes in one network affect the
direction of evolutionary change in interrelated networks which together form
ecological community. A perspective of a region as a localized ecological community
allows for an understanding of innovation as the contingent interaction and causal
feedbacks between social networks and their material and institutional resource
endowment, as for example, in the concept of the localized creative field (Scott, 2006).
Geographers should, however, not fall into the trap of limiting their focus on the region
and the local community. A recent analysis emphasizes the need to study the interplay
between community and the wider institutional foundations of (non-local) society
to understand real regional economic change (Rodrı´guez-Pose and Storper, 2006).
Strategically, the long-term sustainability of regional network trajectories can be
enhanced by supporting diversity. Following the principle of ‘compartmentalization’
(Grabher and Stark, 1997) the co-existence of distinct networks or subclusters offers
future options for bridging and recombination.

3.3.3. Local brokering

In a third perspective, one may conceive only the weak ties to be co-located while the
linkages in a topological cluster are all geographically separated (cf. place 3 in Figure 1).
In the case of network peripherals that are geographically co-located, the interlocking
of these weak ties may yield maximum variation because of the higher degree of
diversity in the pool of knowledge and other resources of the local firms. The local
brokering of separated and diverse network clusters may thus convey a real novel
recombination of knowledge. Empirical examples are the so-called satellite platforms
(Markusen, 1996) where multinational firms co-locate to benefit from territorially
bounded location advantages (e.g. tax conditions, state subsidies, expertise). While
these firms are well connected internationally, they often remain isolated from each
other in the satellite location. Though this geographical network formation may have
been regarded exceptional, it has certainly gained prominence in the global economy.
On the one hand, there are high technology research and development activities that
multinational competitors assign to global centers of excellence in close geographical
proximity to each other (Zeller, 2004). On the other hand, the global offshoring
of manufacturing and increasingly of services creates new satellite places where
multinational corporations co-locate specialized business processes (UNCTAD, 2004).
The agglomeration of similar activities at these peripheral places offers opportunities
for innovation through the local brokering between the operations. Learning from
offshore operations might become indispensable in the future, when new processes and
standards are developed there. In addition, peripheral satellite places may be
appropriate locations to filter contested innovation into multinational organizations.
An interesting series of computer simulations supports a viscosity model of innovation
(McGrath and Krackhardt, 2003): controversial innovation may be more likely to

Economic geography and the evolution of networks . 629

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




diffuse successfully across a network when seeded in the periphery of an organization
and when the organization is only loosely connected.

3.3.4. Mobile brokering

Geographical proximity is often conceived under conditions of permanent location.
However, changing travel technologies and induced patterns of mobility also permit
co-presence in ephemeral encounters. A final way of generating novelty and variation in
tie selection breaks with the notion of fixed locations and assumes a network cluster
of interconnected firms (or firm managers) to be geographically distributed and
who meet repeatedly in temporary clusters, i.e. trade fairs, conventions or other
arrangements of physical encounter. The more mobile managers become the more likely
are they to find non-fixed, temporary contexts of mutual encounter and serendipitous
tie formation. The concepts of ‘ba’ (Nonaka and Konno, 1998) or temporary clusters
(Maskell et al., 2004) illustrate the notion that face-to-face communication, networking
and interpersonal referrals are equally facilitated in trade fairs and conventions as in
contexts of permanent co-location. The extending international mobility of business
will certainly spawn new opportunities for tie formation which countervail against the
traditional mode of permanent locational proximity. In the movie industry, for
instance, producers and studios participate in film festivals around the globe on
repeated annual travel and thus come close to form a transnational community.
While a core of actors may be well connected among each other, each place offers new
opportunities to bridge and broker the core with local but yet unconnected firms.
Bridging relations in these ba-forms of temporary encounter are serendipitous and thus
highly contingent on the actual place. As networks increasingly stretch space and
form permanent and temporary trans-local networks, the mapping of these relation-
ships is anything but a trivial geometrical task. Since this concept abandons the
geometry of fixed location it can no longer be represented in a static map.

4. Conclusion

Evolutionary network change is subject to cumulative mechanisms of retention
which create path-dependent network trajectories. Apart from the established types of
path-dependence discussed in the literature (i.e. technological lock-in, increasing
returns to scale and institutional hysteresis, cf. Martin and Sunley, 2006), the emerging
literature on network evolution suggests additional network-specific mechanisms.
Preferential attachment, embedding and multi-connectivity also induce path-
dependence in inter-firm relationships. Moreover, and instead of simply presuming
novelty, an appropriate evolutionary theory of economic growth should be able to
explain innovation endogenously. This article has not only looked at the path-creating
effects of tie selection but also on its path-disrupting effects. Network variation results
from the process of bridging and brokering between unconnected networks or parts of
networks. A recombination of network topology with geometrical place has offered
alternative models of innovation in regional economic development.
Given the recency and simultaneity of evolutionary theory in economics, organiza-

tion studies, sociology and geography, this article can only be explorative at this stage.
Rather than supplying a coherent theory of regional network evolution, above all,
it is lead by a strong curiosity for the benefit that formal network theory offers to an

630 . Glu¨ckler

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




evolutionary perspective in economic geography. A fruitful application of network
evolution to economic geography depends on both conceptual and empirical advance
with respect to a number of questions. Network structure, for example, is not an end
but a means of facilitating economic growth and innovation. It represents the
architecture through which productive resources, social values and economic interests
circulate. Therefore, the nexus between structure and the actual content of the flows
merits particular attention in future research, as for example the role of technological
overlap between firms (Cantner and Graf, 2006) or firm-specific aspects of integration
in a network (Giuliani, 2006). Moreover, network structure should not be conceived as
deterministic. More research is needed to find out about the drivers and effects of
boundary spanning activities at the micro level: why do which firms bridge network
gaps and what are the real effects for them and for the network structure as a whole?
Another research challenge addresses the role of place as context for network evolution.
Apart from the endogenous mechanisms of retention and variation, environmental
changes may alter crucial conditions. How, for instance, do changes or differences
in the institutional arena of a locality affect network evolution? Since institutions
such as conventions and routines define the rules of interaction they certainly influence
the trajectory of inter-firm networks (Maskell and Malmberg, 2007). Finally, network
evolution is a complex matter because both, relationships and nodes may emerge or
disappear simultaneously. While current network theory prioritizes tie formation, the
causes and consequences of changes in network size should also be addressed.
Geographical cluster theory suggests that regional agglomeration enhances the rate of
firm foundation, spin-offs and relocation. So what is the causality and direction of the
relationship between a path-dependent network trajectory and the growth rate of new
nodes? Apart from this brief selection of empirical research questions, there are
considerable practical problems to be overcome. Relational data are only scarcely
available for industries, organizations and regions. An evolutionary analysis of network
change in and through regional development requires not only relational but
also longitudinal data over considerable time periods which are even more difficult
to obtain (Baum et al., 2003). Network evolution is still in its infancy and the project
is in search for innovative ideas and methods—isn’t this a good time for geography
to join?

References

Ahuja, G. (2000) Collaboration networks, structural holes, and innovation: a longitudinal study,
Administrative Science Quarterly, 45: 425–455.

Amin, A. and Thrift, N. (1992) Neo-Marshallian nodes in global networks, International Journal
of Urban and Regional Research, 16: 571–587.

Baker, W. E. (1990) Market networks and corporate behavior, American Journal of Sociology, 96:
589–625.

Baraba´si, A.-L. and Reka, A. (1999) Emergence of scaling in random networks, Science, 286:
509–512.

Baraba´si, A. L., Jeong, H., Ne´da, Z., Ravasz, E., Schubert, A., Vicsek, T. (2002) Evolution of the
social network of scientific collaborations, Physica A, 311: 590–614.

Bathelt, H. and Glu¨ckler, J. (2005) Resources in economic geography: from substantive concepts
towards a relational perspective, Environment and Planning A, 37: 1545–1563.

Baum, J. A., Shipilov, A. V., Rowley, T. J. (2003) Where do small worlds come from? Industrial
and Corporate Change, 12: 697–725.

Economic geography and the evolution of networks . 631

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




Boschma, R. A. and Frenken, K. (2006) Why is economic geography not an evolutionary science?
Towards an evolutionary economic geography, Journal of Economic Geography, 6: 273–302.

Boschma, R. A. and Lambooy, J. G. (1999) Evolutionary economics and economic geography,
Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 9: 411–429.

Burt, R. (2000) Decay functions, Social Networks, 22: 1–28.
Burt, R. S. (2004) Structural holes and good ideas, American Journal of Sociology, 110: 349–399.
Cantner, U. and Graf, H. (2006) The network of innovators in Jena: an application of social
network analysis, Research Policy, 35: 463–480.

Carley, K. M. (1999) On the evolution of social and organizational networks, Research in the
Sociology of Organizations, 16: 3–30.

Dodds, P., Muhamad, R., Watts, D. J. (2003) An experimental study of search in global social
networks, Science, 301: 827–829.

Doreian, P. and Woodard, K. L. (1999) Local and global institutional processes. In D. Knoke
and S. Andrews (eds) Research in the Sociology of Organizations, pp. 59–83. Greenwich (CT):
JAI Press.

Essletzbichler, J. and Rigby, D. (2007) Exploring evolutionary economic geographies, Journal
of Economic Geography, 7: 549–571.

Fleming, L. and Sorenson, O. (2001) Technology as a complex adaptive system: evidence from
patent data, Research Policy, 30: 1019–1039.

Frankel, M. (1955) Obsolescence and technological change in a maturing economy, American
Economic Review, 45: 296–319.

Freeman, J. H. and Audia, P. G. (2006) Community ecology and the sociology of organizations,
Annual Review of Sociology, 32: 145–169.

Frenken, K. and Boschma, R. A. (2007) A theoretical framework for evolutionary economic
geography: industrial dynamics and urban growth as a branching process, Journal of Economic
Geography, 7: 635–649.

Giuliani, E. (2006) The selective nature of knowledge networks in clusters: evidence from the wine
industry, Journal of Economic Geography, 7: 139–168.

Glaeser, E. L., Kallal, H. D., Scheinkman, J. A., Shleifer, A. (1992) Growth in cities, The Journal
of Political Economy, 100: 1126–1152.

Grabher, G. (2006) Trading routes, bypasses, and risky intersections: mapping the travels of
‘networks’ between economic sociology and economic geography, Progress in Human
Geography, 30: 163–189.

Grabher, G. and Stark, D. (1997) Organizing diversity: evolutionary theory, network analysis
and postsocialism, Regional Studies, 31: 533–544.

Granovetter, M. (2005) The impact of social structure on economic outcomes, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 19: 33–50.

Gulati, R. (1995) Does familiarity breed trust? The implications of repeated ties for contractual
choice in alliances, Academy of Management Journal, 38: 85–112.

Gulati, R. (1998) Alliances and networks, Strategic Management Journal, 19: 293–317.
Gulati, R. (1999) Network location and learning: the influence of network resources and firm
capabilities on alliance formation, Strategic Management Journal, 20: 397–420.

Gulati, R. and Gargiulo, M. (1999) Where do interorganizational networks come from? American
Journal of Sociology, 104: 1439–1493.

Hannan, M. T., Polos, L., Carroll, G. R. (2004) The evolution of inertia, Industrial and Corporate
Change, 13: 213–242.

Hassink, R. (2005) How to unlock regional economies from path dependency? From learning
region to learning cluster, European Planning Studies, 13: 521–535.

Hite, J. M. and Hesterly, W. S. (2001) The evolution of firm networks: from emergence to early
growth of the firm, Strategic Management Journal, 22: 275–286.

Holme, P., Edling, C. R., Liljeros, F. (2004) Structure and time evolution of an internet dating
community, Social Networks, 26: 155–174.

Jacobs, J. (1969) The Economy of Cities. New York: Random House.
Kenis, P. and Knoke, D. (2002) How organizational field networks shape interorganizational
tie-formation rates, Academy of Management Review, 27: 275–293.

Kilduff, M. and Tsai, W. (2003) Social Networks and Organizations. London: Sage.
Knudsen, T. (2002) Economic selection theory, Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 12: 443–470.

632 . Glu¨ckler

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




Kogut, B. and Walker, G. (2001) The small world of Germany and the durability of national
networks, American Sociological Review, 3: 317–335.

Koka, B. R., Madhavan, R., Prescott, J. (2006) The evolution of interfirm networks:
environmental effects on patterns of network change, Academy of Management Review, 31:
721–737.

Krackhardt, D. (1994) Constraints on the interactive organization as an ideal type.
In C. Heckscher and A. Donnellan (eds) The Post-Bureaucratic Organization, pp. 211–222.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Lavie, D. (2004) The evolution and strategy of interconnected firms: a study of the UNISYS
alliance network, Academy of Management Proceedings, E1–E6.

Li, S. X. and Rowley, T. J. (2002) Inertia and evaluation mechanisms in interorganizational
partner selection. Syndicate formation among U.S. investment banks, Academy of Management
Journal, 45: 1104–1119.

Lomi, A., Larsen, E. R., Freeman, J. H. (2005) Things change: dynamic resource constraints and
system-dependent selection in the evolution of organizational populations, Management
Science, 51: 882–903.

Markusen, A. (1996) Sticky places in slippery space: a typology of industrial districts, Economic
Geography, 72: 293–313.

Marquis, C. (2003) The pressure of the past: network imprinting in intercorporate communities,
Administrative Science Quarterly, 48: 655–689.

Marsden, P. V. (1990) Network data and measurement, Annual Review of Sociology, 16:
435–463.

Martin, R. and Sunley, P. (2006) Path dependence and regional economic evolution, Journal of
Economic Geography, 6: 395–437.

Maskell, P., Bathelt, H., Malmberg, A. (2004) Temporary Clusters and Knowledge Creation:
The Effects of International Trade Fairs, Conventions and Other Professional Gatherings. Spaces
2004–04. Marburg: University of Marburg.

Maskell, P. and Malmberg, A. (2007) Myopia, knowledge evolution and cluster development,
Journal of Economic Geography, 7.

McGrath, C. and Krackhardt, D. (2003) Network conditions for organizational change, Journal
of Applied Behavioral Science, 39: 324–336.

McPherson, J. M., Popielarz, P. A., Drobnic, S. (1992) Social networks and organizational
dynamics, American Sociological Review, 57: 153–170.

McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., Cook, J. (2001) Birds of a feather: homophily in social
networks, Annual Review of Sociology, 27: 415–444.

Mitchell, J. C. (1969) The concept and use of social networks. In J. C. Mitchell (ed.) Social
Networks in Urban Situations. Analyses of Personal Relationships in Central African Towns,
pp. 1–50. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Mizruchi, M. S. (1994) Social network analysis: recent achievements and current controversies,
Acta Sociologica, 37: 329–343.

Nachum, L. and Keeble, D. (2003) Neo-Marshallian clusters and global networks: the linkages of
media firms in Central London, Long Range Planning, 36: 459–480.

Nelson, R. (1995) Recent evolutionary theorizing about economic change, Journal of Economic
Literature, 33: 48–90.

Nelson, R. R. and Winter, S. G. (2002) Evolutionary theorizing in economics, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 16: 23–46.

Nonaka, I. and Konno, N. (1998) The concept of ‘ba’: building a foundation for knowledge
creation, California Management Review, 40: 40–54.

Owen-Smith, J. and Powell, W. W. (2004) Knowledge networks as channels and conduits:
the effects of spillovers in the Boston biotechnology community, Organization Science, 15:
5–21.

Penrose, E. T. (1959) The Theory of the Growth of the Firm. Oxford: Blackwell.
Pfeffer, J. and Salancik, G. R. (1978) The External Control of Organizations. New York: Harper
and Row.

Powell, W. W., Koput, K. W., Bowie, J. I., Smith-Doerr, L. (2002) The spatial clustering of
science and capital: accounting for biotech firm-venture capital relationships, Regional Studies,
36: 291–306.

Economic geography and the evolution of networks . 633

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 




Powell, W. W., Koput, K. W., Smith-Doerr, L. (1996) Interorganizational collaboration and
the locus of innovation: networks of learning in biotechnology, Administrative Science
Quarterly, 41: 116–145.

Powell, W. W., White, D., Koput, K. W., Owen-Smith, J. (2005) Network dynamics and field
evolution: the growth of interorganizational collaboration in the life sciences, American Journal
of Sociology, 110: 1132–1205.

Rodrı´guez-Pose, A. and Storper, M. (2006) Better rules or stronger communities? On the social
foundations of institutional change and its economic effects, Economic Geography, 82: 1–25.

Romer, P. (1990) Endogenous technological change, Journal of Political Economy, 98: 71–102.
Rowley, T. J., Greve, H. R., Rao, H., Baum, J. A. C., Shipilov, A. V. (2005) Time to break up:
social and instrumental antecedents of firm exits from exchange cliques, Academy of
Management Journal, 48: 499–520.

Sayer, A. (1991) Behind the locality debate: deconstructing geography’s dualisms, Environment
and Planning A, 23: 283–308.

Sayer, A. (2000) Realism and Social Science. London: Sage.
Schutjens, V. and Stam, E. (2003) The evolution and nature of young firm networks: a
longitudinal perspective, Small Business Economics, 21: 114–134.

Scott, A. J. (2006) Entrepreneurship, innovation and industrial development: geography and the
creative field revisited, Small Business Economics, 26: 1–24.

Sorenson, O. (2003) Social networks and industrial geography, Journal of Evolutionary
Economics, 13: 513–527.

Sorenson, O. (2005) Social networks, informational complexity and industrial geography.
In D. B. Audretsch, D. Fornahl, C. Zellner (eds) The Role of Labour Mobility and Informal
Networks for Knowledge Transfer, pp. 79–95. New York: Springer .

Sorenson, O. and Stuart, T. E. (2001) Syndication networks and the spatial distribution of
venture capital investments, American Journal of Sociology, 106: 1546–1588.

Stinchcombe, A. L. (1965) Social structure and organization. In J. G. March (ed.) Handbook of
Organizations, pp. 142–193. Chicago: Rad McNelly.

Storper, M. and Venables, A. J. (2004) Buzz: face-to-face contact and the urban economy,
Journal of Economic Geography, 4: 351–370.

Storper, M. and Walker, R. (1989) The Capitalist Imperative: Territory, Technology, and
Industrial Growth. New York: Basil Blackwell.

Stuart, T. E. (1998) Network positions and propensities to collaborate: an investigation of
strategic alliance formation in a high-technology industry, Administrative Science Quarterly,
43: 668–698.

UNCTAD (2004) World Investment Report 2004: The Shift Towards Services. New York,
Geneva: United Nations.

Venkatraman, N. and Lee, C.-H. (2004) Preferential linkage and network evolution: a conceptual
model and empirical test in the US video game sector, Academy of Management Journal, 47:
876–892.

Walker, G., Kogut, B., Shan, W. (1997) Social capital, structural holes and the formation of an
industry network, Organization Science, 8: 109–125.

Watts, D. J. (1999) Networks, dynamics, and the small-world phenomenon, American Journal
of Sociology, 105: 493–527.

White, H. C. (1981) Where do markets come from? American Journal of Sociology, 87: 517–547.
Zeller, C. (2004) North Atlantic innovative relations of Swiss pharmaceuticals and the proximities
with regional biotech arenas, Economic Geography, 80: 83–111.

634 . Glu¨ckler

 at U
LB Sachsen-A

nhalt on A
ugust 30, 2012

http://joeg.oxfordjournals.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 



